MID 222301, US v USSR, 20 sep to 20-Oct-78 to 2-Jan-79


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
September 22, 1978

The Turkey arms embargo has now been lifted will be shortly. We hope this will lead to a resolution of the Cyprus dispute. We've opened up an avenue of better trade relationships, better defense relationships with Egypt and Saudi Arabia with the airplane sale. I think it's leading toward Israeli peace, not against Israeli peace. We've been negotiating without ceasing with the Soviet Union on SALT and other matters

We've also been negotiating, talking to our friends and allies, those like France, Belgium, Great Britain, who have the ability to produce and to sell weapons, to get them to join us in this effort. And we have had several meetings with the Soviet Union—I think three so far—to try to get them to join with us in holding down the volume of weapons sales around the world.



Aliquippa, Pennsylvania Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
September 23, 1978

On the international scene, of course, the overwhelming question is peace; not peace by military might imposed on other people, but peace based on two things. One is a strong national defense capability, depending on weapons first of all, hopefully never to be used. But the other one is strength based on what our national character is, treating other people fairly and with respect, with a total commitment to the enhancement of human rights around the world and trying to lessen the tensions that have been built up, for instance, in southern Africa, between ourselves and the Soviet Union, in the Turkey-Greece-Cyprus question, to strengthen the Eastern-Western European confrontation, in the Middle East, to restore our good, friendly relationships with countries that in the past have been our enemies. These are the kinds of things that I would like to do in the international scene


Columbus, Ohio Remarks at a State Democratic Party Reception. 
September 23, 1978

We're working hard to get a SALT agreement with the Soviet Union. I hope it won't be long-coming in the future. We've strengthened NATO, repaired the damage that had been done between ourselves and Japan


Democratic National Committee Remarks at a Fundraising Dinner. 
September 27, 1978

We are now working on the last phases of a SALT II agreement with the Soviet Union, which I hope to consummate very soon. And we have stopped the spread of nuclear weapons and the capability to have nuclear explosions around the world. The Congress did that; I'm grateful to them


The President's News Conference
September 28, 1978
THE PRESIDENT. The issues that divide us and the Soviet Union on SALT have been constantly narrowed over the last 18 months of negotiation. Now the issues are quite few. 
I also talked to Secretary Vance since lunch. He's been meeting today and yesterday with Foreign Minister Gromyko of the Soviet Union. I think that both men are negotiating aggressively and in good faith to reach a conclusion of the differences. 
I don't know what the outcome will be. It takes two to reach agreement. We hope to conclude a SALT agreement this year, and I will be meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko Saturday to capitalize upon the progress that I hope that Vance and Gromyko are making now. I don't see any insurmountable obstacles. But if the Soviets are forthcoming and cooperative and are willing to compromise some of their positions, we will have an agreement
THE PRESIDENT. That is one among many ideas. I think over a period of time, it has become obvious that our fixed silotype intercontinental ballistic missiles are becoming more and more vulnerable because of the accuracy of the Soviet missiles—ours are even more accurate—and the MIRVing of the Soviet missiles, where they have many warheads on each missile—which we've had for a long time. 
The so-called multiple aim points, or many silos for each missile, is one idea that has been put forward. It has some very serious defects. I can only mention two at this time. One is, how do you verify that all the holes don't have missiles in them? It's obvious that we would be keeping the agreement, and we would not violate it. We don't know that that would be the case on the other side. And I believe that we would find, as we proceed further with it, that it would not only be very difficult if the Soviets adopted this same policy, but very expensive as well. 
But that is one option that we are considering. And I would guess that by the end of this year, we would have gone through all the options including that one. And at that time, certainly at the time that SALT II agreement is reached, I will explain to the American people in the most careful and complete terms what our future plans for adequate strategic strength will be, probably going for the next 5 years. 
That's just one of the options now. It has some very serious defects. It's being considered



Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Members of the National Association of Farm Broadcasting. 
September 29, 1978

In foreign affairs, we are progressing slowly, sometimes haltingly, but I think in a good spirit, with the Soviet Union in concluding a SALT agreement, hopefully this year. I'll meet tomorrow morning with Foreign Minister Gromyko, who's been meeting the last 2 days in New York with Secretary Vance on that and a comprehensive test ban


Orlando, Florida Remarks at the Opening Session of the 26th World Conference of the International Chamber of Commerce. 
October 1, 1978

I've often wondered what would have happened if we had the same bonds of trade and commerce before 1939 or before 1941. That's why I'm such a staunch advocate of global commerce. That's why I'm determined to increase substantially United States trade with other nations, including the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China.


Baltimore, Maryland Remarks at a Fundraising Dinner for Harry Hughes. 
October 10, 1978

But we're also trying to use our good offices to bring an end to bloodshed in other parts of the world: in the Middle East, with a permanent peace there for the first time in history; in Lebanon. Secretary Vance left Pretoria, South Africa, this morning, having tried to put together an end to the potential bloodshed and dispute in Namibia. We've been working on the problems in Rhodesia. He's on the way to the Soviet Union this afternoon to continue his discussions on SALT. Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State, left at 3 o'clock this afternoon, going to Greece. And we hope we can finally bring some resolution of the problems between Greece and Turkey and the Cypriots who have suffered so much on Cyprus


The President's News Conference
October 10, 1978
THE PRESIDENT. I would not want to comment on that particular case. Whenever the Soviets discover any information about our classified material, it's obviously potentially damaging to our country. It has not affected our SALT negotiations. I stated publicly, I think for the first time a President has done so, down at Cape Kennedy, Cape Canaveral, two or three Sundays ago, that we did have aerial surveillance. And I think that it's important for the American people to know that in the past and present and in the future, that our aerial surveillance capability would be adequate to affirm that the agreement on SALT, those in existence and those in the future, would be adequate. 
So, the revelation of any secret information or classified information is something to be avoided. It has not affected the SALT talks. Our ability to verify compliance will be adequate in the future. 
THE PRESIDENT. They are Russian citizens, as you know, and have been in the embassy in the Soviet Union, in Moscow, the American Embassy, for months. We have provided them a place to stay. We provided them a room to live in, even though this is not a residence with normal quarters for them. I would presume that they have no reason to smuggle out correspondence to this country since they have the embassy officials' ability to transmit messages. I have not directed the embassy to discharge them from the embassy,
no

Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
October 13, 1978

THE PRESIDENT. I've just followed them through the press. I've not been involved in them in any way. My own sense is that they've been thoroughly investigated, and I haven't detected in the last 3 or 4 years or more of investigations that anyone's minds have been changed. There are Americans who will always consider the assassination of President Kennedy to have been the result of an international plot of some kind, originating in the Soviet Union or in Cuba or somewhere else. And I've never seen anything that contradicted what the Warren report said in any substantive degree




Wichita, Kansas Remarks at a Bill Signing Ceremony for S. 3447. 
October 21, 1978

We've changed recently theright of the Soviet Union to buy from 8 million metric tons of grain up to 15 million metric tons of grain without going through the procedure of getting approval for it. We've got the grain on hand. We want the Soviets to buy it


Rochester, Minnesota Remarks at the Rochester Municipal Airport. 
October 21, 1978

I'm not going to go down a whole list of things he's done, because that would take too much time. But I would like to say this: I believe that our country has now and always must have the strongest defense capability on Earth. Wendy Anderson just happens to serve on the defense committee in the Senate, the Armed Services Committee. And he, along with me next year, is committed to bringing to our Nation a new SALT agreement hammered out with the Soviets, protecting our interests, to be another major step in eliminating the threat of nuclear war, not only for our own country and the whole world. And I need Wendy Anderson in Washington to help me get that SALT agreement ratified by the Senate


Minneapolis, Minnesota Remarks at a Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party Victory Rally. 
October 21, 1978

He left there to go to the Soviet Union, and he's now negotiating with Foreign Minister Gromyko and President Brezhnev, trying to bring back to me response to proposals that would secure an effective and adequate SALT agreement to remove the threat of nuclear weapons that endangers the lives of all those on Earth. And I need Wendy Anderson and I need the whole Democratic group to help me next year get it ratified


Miami Beach, Florida Remarks at a State Democratic Party Rally. 
October 26, 1978

We're negotiating every day to bring about a good SALT agreement with the Soviet Union, to cut down the level of atomic weapons. And the Congress has already passed a very good nonproliferation bill which prevents countries who don't have atomic weapons from having them in the future. 
Our country is now respected by others. We are no longer the butt of all the jokes. We're no longer the target of all the attacks by the small nations, the weak nations, the new nations, the nations whose people might be brown or yellow or black. We've spread our influence in a beneficial way, and we've let our potential adversaries, the Soviet Union and others, know that we're going to stay strong


Buffalo, New York Remarks at the Greater Buffalo International Airport. 
October 28, 1978

We're negotiating now a SALT agreement with the Soviet Union to cut down the threat of nuclear weapons destroying us all. The Congress passed a very good bill this year, nonproliferation, it's called, to prevent nations that don't have atomic explosives from ever having them


Hartford, Connecticut Remarks at a Fundraising Reception for Governor Ella Grasso. 
October 28, 1978

We have the strongest military force on Earth, and we're going to keep it that way. I lived and worked as a young officer in Connecticut, in New London, when I was in submarines on two different occasions, and I know how much your own State has contributed to a strong national defense. With that strength can come steps toward peace. We're negotiating a new SALT agreement with the Soviet Union. We're working on it every day. 
Very early next month Abe Ribicoff will take 10 other Members of the Senate to the Soviet Union to explore new ways whereby we might guarantee peace with them and a growing sense of friendship


Lynn, Massachusetts Remarks at a State Democratic Party Rally. 
October 28, 1978

We're negotiating every day with the Soviet Union to bring about a SALT agreement to reduce the threat of atomic weapons that hang over our heads, those of the Soviet Union and indeed the entire world. The Congress has already passed a bill that was called the nonproliferation bill to keep nations who don't presently have atomic weapons from getting them. 
The Republican Senator from this State has said that he wants us to put a moratorium on negotiating with the Soviets to limit nuclear weapons. This would be a serious mistake, to stop trying for world peace, to stop trying for nuclear weapons. And as long as I'm in the White House, we'll continue to negotiate to keep our Nation's strength, to cut down on nuclear weapons, and eliminate this great threat from the entire world


Portland, Maine Remarks at the Annual Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner. 
October 28, 1978

Our farmers were facing a new depression. Their income was going down; prices were below the cost of production. There was a problem with exports. The Government had its nose too deeply into the affairs of the farm families. The wild fluctuations in prices were exacerbated by embargoes against the sale of American farm products to foreign countries, not just the Soviet Union but countries like Japan. The farmers didn't know where to turn

We are negotiating every day to bring a new SALT agreement between ourselves and the Soviet Union to lessen the fear of world destruction with nuclear weapons. The Congress passed a new law, nonproliferation bill, that prevents nations that don't have atomic explosives from ever having them. It has not been an easy thing.


Gresham, Oregon Remarks at a "Get Out the Vote" Rally. 
November 3, 1978

We're working to bring peace to Cyprus. We're trying to have a SALT agreement negotiated with the Soviet Union, to remove once and for all the threat of nuclear destruction from the entire world. And I intend to succeed in having a good SALT agreement in the next few weeks


Sacramento, California Remarks at a "Get Out the Vote" Rally. 
November 3, 1978

We're searching for peace, as well, to remove the threat of atomic destruction. We're negotiating every day with the Soviet Union to have a SALT agreement, and I hope before too many weeks goes by, we will be successful. The Congress has passed a nonproliferation bill that prevents nations who don't have atomic explosives from ever having them in the future


Duluth, Minnesota Remarks at a "Get Out the Vote" Rally. 
November 3, 1978

We are working every day with the Soviet Union to have a good SALT agreement, to remove the threat of nuclear weapons from their destructive power over the entire Earth. The Congress has passed a nonproliferation bill that prevents nations who don't have atomic explosives from ever having them in the future


The President's News Conference
November 9, 1978
The election of Republican Senators and their effect on the SALT ratification—I think both liberals and conservatives, Democrats and Republicans favor an agreement with the Soviet Union which would limit the threat of nuclear arms in the future. We have been negotiating the SALT II agreement now for almost 2 years, even longer, including the time my own predecessors spent on this effort. And I believe that if the SALT treaty is well balanced—and it certainly will be—it will be infinitely superior to no treaty at all and much better than the SALT I agreement under which we presently live



Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Bill Moyers of the Public Broadcasting Service. 
November 13, 1978

We're dealing with the question of a strong national defense, some concern about the good intentions of potential adversaries like the Soviet Union on the one hand. At the same time we are struggling valiantly to find common ground on which we can assure peace between us and better friendship and a minimization of the distrust

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. I haven't found anything easy about this job. But I didn't expect it to be easy when I came here. Well, I mentioned one earlier, the fact that we have to be very protective of our Nation's security and cover every eventuality if we don't make progress toward peace with the Soviet Union. 
At the same time, we have to explore every possibility to have a peaceful relationship with the Soviet Union, to alleviate tensions and to find common grounds on which we can actually build friendships in the future. And these two are not only extremely complicated, each side of that possibility, but apparently are in conflict. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, to be perhaps excessively generous, but not too far off the mark, I think, first of all, they want peace and security for their own people, and they undoubtedly exaggerate any apparent threat to themselves and have to, to be sure that they are able to protect themselves. At the same time, as is the case with us, they would like to expand their influence among other people in the world, believing that their system of government, their philosophy is the best. This means that we have to plan in the future, in the presence of peace between us, to be competitive with them and able to compete both aggressively and successfully. 
But I would say that those are their two basic motives, as is the case with us—security for themselves and to have their own influence felt in the rest of the world as much as possible. 
THE PRESIDENT. They will never be superior to us in national strength nor overall military strength. We are by far the stronger nation economically. Our productivity capacity is superior, and I think always will be. 
We've got a vibrant, dynamic social and political system based on freedom, individuality, and a common purpose that's engendered from the desire of our own people, not imposed from above by an autocratic government. I think our absence of desire to control other people around the world gives us a competitive advantage once a new government is established or as they search about for friends. We are better trusted than the Soviet Union. They spend more than twice as much of their gross national product on military matters, but we are still much stronger, and we will always be stronger than they are, at least in our lifetimes. 
We are surrounded by friends and allies-Canada in the north, Mexico in the south—two open and accessible oceans on the east and west. The Soviets, when looked at from the perspective of the Kremlin, are faced with almost a billion Chinese, who have a strong animosity and distrust toward the Soviets. Toward the west, in Eastern Europe, their allies and friends can't be depended on nearly so strongly as our own. They have a difficult chance to have access to the oceans in an unrestricted fashion; their climate is not as good as ours; their lands are not as productive. 
And so, I think that in any sort of present or future challenge from the Soviet Union, our Nation stacks up very well, and I thank God for it. 
THE PRESIDENT. In nuclear weapons, which is, you know, where our competition with the Soviets is most direct, we've both accepted the concept of rough equivalency; that is, we are just about equal. They have heavier warheads; we have more of them. We have three different systems for delivery of warheads—if we ever need to, and I don't think we ever will have to—that are mutually supportive. We have a much higher developed electronics technology; our surveillance systems are probably as good or better than theirs. Our submarines are quieter than theirs. 
So, I think that in the case of nuclear weapons, we have an equivalency with them, and they recognize it, and vice versa. Both of us realize that no one can attack the other with impunity. We can absorb, even if we had to, an attack by the Soviets and still destroy their country, and they know it, and vice versa. 
So, I think that the horrible threat of surety of mutual destruction will prevent an attack being launched. We don't intend to evolve and neither do the Soviets intend to evolve a capability to destroy the other nation without ourselves being destroyed by nuclear forces. 
In the case of land weapons, as I said before, the Soviets have vulnerable borders. They have neighbors whom they can't trust as well as we. And they fact, even in the nuclear field three other nuclear powers who are potential adversaries in case of a crisis—the Chinese, the British, and the French—in addition to ourselves. We don't have any of those as potential adversaries for us. 
But I think for any nation to have a macho attitude, that we're going to be so powerful that we can dominate or destroy the other nation, would be counterproductive. And I don't think that even if we wanted to do that, either we or the Soviets could have that capability
We don't have any evidence that the Soviets, for instance, are trying to disrupt the existing government structure in Iran nor that they are a source of violence in Iran. I think they recognize—they have a very long mutual border with Iran, and a stable government there, no matter who its leaders might be, is valuable to them. 
This might change. If it becomes obvious that the Shah is very vulnerable and that other forces might come into power, the Soviets might change their obvious posture. But that's the observation that we have now


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session at a Breakfast With Members of the White House Correspondents Association. 
November 16, 1978

THE PRESIDENT. I'm determined that our relationships with the Soviet Union will improve as we go into the next 2 years. With every passing week, we have resolved part of the differences concerning SALT. In spite of a couple of illadvised statements by me that we would be having a SALT agreement within the next few weeks— [laughter] —we have made steady progress. And I think that when I do meet with Brezhnev—and I think "when" is a proper word instead of "if;" we don't know exactly when it will be—then the agenda to be discussed would be quite broad. 
The centerpiece of it would be to culminate the SALT negotiations with a SALT II agreement. But I think at that time we would be prepared to discuss, I hope without any excessive time pressure and with very good preparation, the broadest range of differences that exist between ourselves and the Soviet Union. 
I think that in recent weeks there has been an alleviation of tension between us. And I would like to see that progress continue. 
THE PRESIDENT. I can't say why. I think at the time of the Shcharanskiy trial, there was a combination of differences that probably made us reach a low point, at least in my own administration. And I think since then we've moved forward on better relations, a better understanding, more harmony, and less disputes with the public media. 
THE PRESIDENT. NO, I don't think so, because we've not prepared an agenda yet. But it certainly would not be exclusively limited to SALT. And I think that any differences we have with the Soviets, we ought to put them on the table and discuss them. But the agenda would have to be worked out jointly with them before any announcement of it was made
THE PRESIDENT. As is the case in almost every answer I've given you this morning, there are two sides of the issue in domestic and international affairs-our relations with the Soviets, our relations with Egypt and Israel, our relations with the Congress, controlling inflation versus meeting the needs of our people. Tell me exactly what you asked.



Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
November 17, 1978

In a nonpublicized way—not a secret way, but a nonpublicized way—we are continuing our discussions with the Soviet Union on a wide range of subjects, SALT seeing the most important of all


The President's News Conference
November 30, 1978
THE PRESIDENT. Well, let me answer the last part first. Our nuclear policy basically is one of deterrence; to take actions that are well known by the American people and well known by the Soviets and other nations; that any attack on us would result in devastating destruction by the nation which launched an attack against us. So, the basic policy is one of deterrence. 
We, obviously, constantly assess the quality of our own nuclear weapon systems as times change, as technological advances are made, and as the change takes place in the Soviet Union's arsenal. We keep our weapons up to date; we improve our communications and command and information systems. But we will maintain basically a deterrent policy rather than to change the basic policy itself
THE PRESIDENT. We don't have any intention of selling any weapons to either China or the Soviet Union. We are improving our relationships with the People's Republic of China as time goes on, even short of complete diplomatic normalization. Our goal, however, is to move toward normalization in accordance with the Shanghai Communiqu? agreements. The attitude of China, the domestic situation in China, has changed, and we watch it with great interest

But I have not yet decided when to move on the M-X or if to move on the M-X, what to do about making sure that our present silo missiles are secure. The Soviet missiles, as have ours in recent years, have been improved in their quality, particularly in their accuracy. And this makes the one leg of our so-called triad more vulnerable, that is, the fixed silo missiles

We would consider it to be a very serious development if the Soviet Union violated the 1962 agreement. When we have interrogated the Soviet Union through diplomatic channels, they have assured us that no shipments of weapons to the Cubans have or will violate the terms of the 1962 agreement. We will monitor their compliance with this agreement very carefully, which we have been doing in the past, both as to the quality of weapons sent there and the quantity of weapons sent there, to be sure that there is no offensive threat to the United States possible from Cuba


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
December 1, 1978

In foreign affairs, we are continuing our effort to bring about a resolution of the SALT negotiations, pursuing our conventional arms talks with the Soviet Union, trying to reduce the distribution of conventional arms throughout the world, as a matter of fact. We still hope that without much delay, we can meet at the top level between ourselves and the Soviets to sign a SALT II treaty

I have felt for a good while that our civil defense effort should be reassessed. We have primarily observed the Soviets' interest in civil defense, the massive evacuation of their major cities, including Moscow. This causes some concern, that if we should have a seriously deteriorating relationship with the Soviet Union, so that even the prospect of war was extant, that both sides would want to prepare themselves to minimize deaths in case a war should occur. I think this is obviously a very unlikely prospect. But our capability in transportation is certainly equal to or superior to that of the Soviet Union. 
And the fact that we are assessing how we would go about partial evacuation of our major cities if war became possibly imminent is, I think, not a radical thing. It's not designed for propaganda purposes. It's not designed to influence the Soviets, or to influence the Congress to approve SALT. It's just a routine matter that is being pursued by me
We are much closer to a SALT agreement now than we were before. I think we are down to the last stages of negotiation. Our position and that of the Soviets is clear, and I think if the Soviets want a SALT agreement, the door is open to them to have one. 


Universal Declaration of Human Rights Remarks at a White House Meeting Commemorating the 30th Anniversary of the Declaration's Signing. 
December 6, 1978

To those who doubt the wisdom of our dedication, I say this: Ask the victims. Ask the exiles. Ask the governments which continue to practice repression. Whether in Cambodia or Chile, in Uganda or South Africa, in Nicaragua or Ethiopia or the Soviet Union, governments know that we in the United States care. And not a single one of those who is actually taking risks or suffering for human rights has ever asked me to desist in our support of basic human rights. From the prisons. from the camps, from the enforced exiles, we receive one message: Speak up, persevere, let the voice of freedom be heard


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Breakfast With Members of the White House Correspondents Association. 
December 7, 1978

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think it's obvious that there are planes in Cuba that can carry an atomic weapon if they are outfitted to do so, designed specifically to do so, and if the crew is trained to do so. There are many relatively small, commercial-type jets that have a physical capability of carrying a nuclear weapon, which in this modern technological age can be relatively small in weight. But I think that's as far as I want to go with my answer. 
You know, the physical capability of picking up that much weight, carrying it to the shores of the United States and dropping it, is certainly there. But whether the planes are outfitted to do it, designed to do it, crews are trained to do it, is an entirely different matter, and we don't have any indication that this is the case. But we are continuing to monitor that circumstance, and act accordingly. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, there would certainly be a numerical mix that I can't describe and don't have in my mind now that we would consider in violation of the 1962 agreement. And the 1962 agreement was certainly very unclear on this. The technology and the capability of airplanes, almost all the extant airplanes then, have been modified or replaced, and there would be a mix of quality and quantity. Even if I knew, I wouldn't broadcast it publicly. There might be at that time of crisis, which does not presently exist, a difference between ourselves and the Soviet Union, but I don't think I could define it any more clearly. 
The Soviets have assured us that they still stand behind the 1962 agreement, have not violated it, and I think my answer at the press conference was carefully worded. And I think it's adequate
I have been pleased recently with the progress being made on SALT. The remaining differences are minor, compared to what they were a year ago, and in my own mind I can see a way to resolve them. If the Soviets are adequately forthcoming, I would guess that any further delay would be minimal. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think an almost inevitable progress would be to continue to define the narrowing differences. And there's been steady progress; there never has been a time when we retrogressed on SALT. Then I think there would be a preparation period for a summit meeting, certainly at the Foreign Minister level, between Secretary Vance and Gromyko, and possibly others, and then a summit meeting between myself and Brezhnev, whenever he and I agree there would be a reasonable opportunity for success. 
I think because of their attitude, which I have assessed over the last—almost 2 years, President Brezhnev's inclination is not to have a summit meeting unless there is a sure conclusion of SALT in prospect. But I would like to have, if he should come over here, a 4- or 5-day period where we might discuss a broad range of agenda items and not narrowly focus it just on military items. And of course, that would require very careful preparation


Memphis, Tennessee Remarks at the Opening Session of the 1978 National Democratic Party Conference. 
December 8, 1978

We have been negotiating daily and we are now negotiating daily with the Soviet Union on a new treaty to limit strategic arms. We hope soon to sign a SALT agreement which will strengthen the security of the United States, will provide for accurate verification, and will substantially reduce the threat of nuclear war


Memphis, Tennessee Remarks at the Democratic National Committee's National Finance Council Breakfast. 
December 9, 1978

We're trying to reach agreement with the Soviet Union on a SALT II treaty, and we're making good progress. My anticipation is that we will have, soon, a success. This obviously can't be guaranteed, because we don't ever know what the Soviet Government will do. But the differences that still divide us are very tiny compared to the differences that we've already resolved. But we've not been afraid to stand firm. I have never let a time deadline put me in a vulnerable position. We've not been hasty. And I can assure you that when the SALT agreement is presented to the American people, that it will meet the standards that we set forth


Memphis, Tennessee Question-and-Answer Session at the National Democratic Conference Workshop on Defense Policies and Arms Control. 
December 9, 1978

These nations, by the way, include the Soviet Union, all our European allies, South Africa, that we deliberately brought into the discussions because we were concerned about their taking the products of regular powerplants and turning them into explosives. This is a new thing that hasn't been well publicized. But it's an ongoing program, and we've been very pleased with that

THE PRESIDENT. I might say that the answer to the last question—I think it is necessary, and we are trying to accomplish this in two ways, to avoid that imbalance that might evolve if the Soviets ever get a demonstrable advantage over us. The most efficacious way to handle it is by stringent SALT agreements. 
In the upcoming SALT agreement, we will have a substantial reduction in the limits. The reduction will not be a constraint on us, because we have not built at the rate the Soviets have. If the SALT II agreement goes through as we contemplate it, the Soviets will have to destroy several hundred of their existing missiles. 
And part of the SALT II agreement which has not been publicized is that it outlines or reestablishes officially a commitment to proceed without delay on SALT III. I contemplate a much more drastic cut in overall missile levels of all kinds in SALT III than we will be able to accomplish in SALT II. 
As you know, early in 1977 we proposed a drastic cut to the Soviets. They rejected it, in retrospect, I think, primarily because Brezhnev had a great deal of personal investment in the Vladivostok agreement, and he thought we ought to consummate Vladivostok before we moved on more drastic cuts. And if and when Brezhnev and I meet at a summit conference to wrap up the SALT II agreement, high on the agenda will be a SALT III discussion for much more drastic cuts in overall missile levels than SALT II envisions. 
Of course, the other facet of it—and much less attractive—is, under any given SALT agreement, no matter what the levels are for bombers, for cruise missiles, for sea-launched ICBM-type missiles, or for silo missiles, or for mobile missiles, to make sure .that we do retain this rough equivalency, because if the Soviets have, in the eyes of the world, a demonstrable advantage, if they feel that with relative impunity they can attack us, it puts us at a decided disadvantage in all sorts of political and economic ways. And we would lose our beneficial influence throughout the world for peace and let the Soviets dominate in the minds of those who are looking for strength in their partnership. 
So, we're trying to agree completely with you, to cut down on the overall level, to maintain a rough equivalency. And I think in SALT III, we'll be much more successful. My hope is and my tentative belief is that Brezhnev wants the same thing I do, a drastic cut in SALT III
We spend about 5 percent of our gross national product on defense. The estimates are that the Soviets spend between 13 and 15 percent of their gross national product on defense. Senator Culver and I are very strong allies, and we're in harmony on almost everything. But to say that we are wasting money or to insinuate that we might be wasting money because we build weapons that are never used and that rust away in the warehouse is exactly what we hope. We build weapons for peace and to let the world know that our Nation is strong. And I hope that when we build a Trident submarine, or when we build ICBM's, or when we build a tank, or when we build a rocket or an airplane, that it will never be used, that it will never be used. And only the accurate knowledge in the Kremlin that we are strong and that we are going to stay strong and not vulnerable is the only guarantee that we will not have to use our weapons and not have to expend the lives of our young people in combat. 
The last thing I'd like to say is this: It takes two nations to negotiate an agreement. And if I could have unilaterally sat down in the Oval Office and written a SALT agreement, it might be different from what I had to negotiate over the last 20 months with the Soviets. 
Again, I think we will have negotiated a very fine SALT II agreement, and we have personally fought for much more drastic reductions than the Soviets have yet been willing to accept. This is a continuing process. It's been going on for years, even decades. And my commitment is, as I said in my inaugural address, to remove the threat of nuclear weapons completely from the world. I don't know if I'll accomplish this while I'm in office, but that's my goal. And I'm going to do the best I can to achieve that goal as President of this country.



Memphis, Tennessee Question-and-Answer Session at the National Democratic Conference Workshop on Inflation. 
December 9, 1978

I have to match American military strength with that of the Soviet Union. It is a constant problem for me, a constant challenge. It's one I accept readily. Any President in the past or future would have to meet that commitment. The Soviet Union does not have the advantage of idealism, of freedom, liberty, of honoring independence or nationalist trends in foreign countries. They don't have a commitment to a better life for people built on freedom. They depend substantially on their influence to challenge us on military strength. 
We spend about 5 percent of our gross national product on the military. It's been reducing year by year for a long period of time—5 percent. The Soviets spend between 13 percent and 15 percent of their gross national product on the military. We have tried and are trying, not desperately, but with determination, to cut down on the allocation of resources to the military. We can't do it by unilaterally putting ourselves in a vulnerable position versus the Soviet Union


The President's News Conference
December 12, 1978
THE PRESIDENT. We've made good progress on SALT. I can't say that we've reached agreement. A statement will be made later on today by the State Department and by the Soviets simultaneously about a possible meeting of the Foreign Ministers. 
I think that there has been steady progress made in the last, almost 2 years. I can't recall any time when there was a retrogression or a pause in the commitment to reach a SALT agreement. Our position has been clear. We have harmony, I believe, among the Defense Department, State Department, and the White House on what should be the United States position. If the Soviets are adequately forthcoming, we will have an agreement without further delay. If they are not forthcoming, then we'll continue to negotiate. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think that as we approach the time when we are sure that the items have been resolved that are still under negotiation, at that time we will have a summit meeting. And at that summit meeting we will discuss not only concluding the SALT agreement officially but also have a broad agenda of other items that are of mutual interest to us and the Soviet Union
Of course, we have to put trade in a proper perspective. We can't assess trade itself completely separated from our overall relationships with Communist countries, particularly those who are potential adversaries of ours, like the Soviet Union. 
We want to have increased trade with the Soviet Union and with the People's Republic of China. I think the statistics will show that recently we have had increasing trade with both those countries, compared to last year or several years ago. 
We have one more point, and that is security restraints. If there is a sale of high technology items to the Soviet Union, or the People's Republic of China, proposed, then not only do the Commerce Department and the State Department and the National Security Council assess this, but I refer it to the Defense Department as well, to be sure that we are not deliberately or inadvertently giving to those countries a means by which their military capabilities would be greatly escalated. This would be contrary to the existing law. 
But within the bounds of those restraints, we are attempting to improve our relationships with the People's Republic of China and with the Soviet Union. And in the process, as part of a stream of increased interrelationships, improved relationships, enhanced trade


Interview With the President and Mrs. Carter Question-and-Answer Session With Barbara Walters of the American Broadcasting Company. 
December 14, 1978

When I became President, I think it's accurate to say that NATO was weakened and also dispirited. There was a lack of conviction among our European allies and others that we were dedicated to a strong Western Europe, to withstand the potential threat from Eastern Europe and from the Soviet Union. I do not intend to go back on my commitment to NATO

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. President Brezhnev and I exchanged messages. 
THE PRESIDENT. Within the last few weeks, a couple of weeks. And I made it very clear to them, to the Soviets, that we have no intention of interfering in the internal affairs of Iran and that we have no intention of permitting others to interfere in the internal affairs of Iran. 
THE PRESIDENT. As far as we know, they have not. We monitor the situation closely. Obviously, there is a Communist party there, the Tudeh party, which perhaps is inclined to encourage violence or disruption in order to change the existing government. But the Shah is communicating with opposition leaders. He is committed to a broader base for the government. He is working toward democratic principles and social change. And he has been embattled lately. And we obviously support him fully. 
THE PRESIDENT. NO. We have treaty agreements with Iran. We have strong defense agreements with Iran. We look on Iran, as do their neighbors, as being a stabilizing factor. Even the Soviet Union shares a long border with Iran. I'm sure they want stability there on their border. Exactly the formation of the government—I can't speak for the Soviets, but I think that for world peace and for the Soviets, and for us, certainly for the entire Middle East-Persian Gulf region, a stability is desirable, and that's what we want, also
THE PRESIDENT. The SALT agreement, when concluded—and I think it'll be quite soon—will be in the best interests of our country. It will enhance our own security. And whether we trust the Soviets or not, we will have an adequate ability to verify whether or not they comply. So, the American people need not be concerned about that


Diplomatic Relations Between the United States and the People's Republic of China Remarks at a White House Briefing Following the Address to the Nation. 
December 15, 1978

This afternoon the Soviet Union officials were notified through their Ambassador there, Mr. Dobrynin. And I think the Soviets were familiar with the fact that we were anticipating normalization whenever the Chinese were willing to meet our reasonable terms, and they were not surprised. As you well know, the Soviet Union and People's Republic of China have diplomatic relations between themselves. 
My own assessment is that this will be well received in almost every nation of the world, perhaps all of them, because it will add to stability. And the Soviets and others know full well, because of our own private explanations to them, not just recently but in months gone by, that we have no desire whatsoever to use our new relationships with China to the disadvantage of the Soviets or anyone else. We believe this will enhance stability and not cause instability in Asia and the rest of the world
To answer the other question, I don't think this will have any adverse effect at all on the SALT negotiations as an independent matter. And I think that the Soviets, as I said earlier, have been expecting this development. They were not surprised, and we have kept them informed recently. Their reaction has not been adverse, and we will proceed aggressively as we have in recent months, in fact throughout my own administration, to conclude a successful SALT agreement



Diplomatic Relations Between the United States and the People's Republic of China Interview With Walter Cronkite of the Columbia Broadcasting System. 
December 19, 1978

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I've had a personal message delivered to me this afternoon from President Brezhnev expressing his understanding that ourcommitment is to peace in the entire world, acknowledging the fact that the American position is that our new relationship with the People's Republic of China will contribute to world peace, and acknowledging the fact that the proper relationship between major sovereign nations is to have full diplomatic relations. 
So, I would characterize his personal message to me as being very positive in tone. And I can say without any doubt that our new relationship with China will not put any additional obstacles in the way of a successful SALT agreement and also will not endanger our good relationships with the Soviet Union. 
THE PRESIDENT. I can't set the schedule for him. My hope is that President Brezhnev would come before Mr. Teng comes to Washington. 
As you know, Secretary Vance will be meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko day after tomorrow, the 21st, and at that time we'll see if the SALT agreements are coming to a successful conclusion. If so, we will extend immediately again an invitation to President Brezhnev to come here during the middle part of January. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we have not made any plans for that. And I would presume that both leaders might invite me to come to their countries sometime in the future. And I would look with favor on those invitations, but not anytime soon. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I really can't assess any interrelationship between the two. The agreement with China was not designed to put any sort of pressure on the Soviet Union. I think the outcome of the new relationship between ourselves and the billion people of China and their government is constructive and positive and contributes toward the lessening of tension rather than the building up of additional tension. And that applies to our relationship with the Soviet Union as well as to other countries

Plains, Georgia Informal Exchange With Reporters Following a Visit With Allie Smith. 
December 25, 1978

THE PRESIDENT. We don't know what the Soviets' motivations are. I talked to Secretary Vance yesterday afternoon after he got back home, and he was encouraged with the meetings with the Soviets and also thought that the Israelis and the Egyptians had a good, solid discussion. And it was constructive; he felt very pleased with it. I think we will have a peace treaty for the Middle East, and I think we will have a SALT agreement with the Soviets. It just takes time. The complications of all the issues are not easily resolved. But I still feel hopeful, and I and Secretary Vance both agree that we're not discouraged at all. 
THE PRESIDENT. My guess is that it's been put back some, but we don't have a definite period. The differences on the SALT agreement have been narrowed considerably in the last week. There are still a couple of issues that will be discussed and resolved, as Secretary Vance announced, through diplomatic channels and through the regular negotiating teams. But I don't foresee any need for another Foreign Ministers meeting, and I think that we have an excellent chance of a fairly early meeting between myself and President Brezhnev. My guess is, though, that it will not be in January. We would be ready in January if the Soviets are. 
THE PRESIDENT. Parts of those have been ironed out. I think it might be better to let Secretary Vance give you a specific rundown later on on the remaining issues, because they are still under negotiation. And we've had, I think, a fairly well honored agreement with the Soviets that we won't discuss specific issues through the press; we'll let that be done through more private means.




