MID 222501, US v Cuba, 6 jul to 5-Aug-79 to 20-Nov-79



The President's News Conference
July 25, 1979
THE PRESIDENT. It's a mistake for Americans to assume or to claim that every time an evolutionary change takes place, or even an abrupt change takes place in this hemisphere, that somehow it's the result of secret, massive Cuban intervention. The fact in Nicaragua is that the incumbent government, the Somoza regime, lost the confidence of the Nicaraguan people. There was a broad range of forces assembled to replace Somoza and his regime as the head of the Nicaraguan Government. 
We worked as closely as we could without intervening in the internal affairs of Nicaragua with the neighboring countries and with the so-called Andean Group in the northern part of South America to bring about an orderly transition. Our effort was to let the people of Nicaragua ultimately make a decision on who should be their leader, what form of government they should have. We also wanted to minimize bloodshed and to restore stability. That is presently being done. We have a good relationship with the new government. We hope to improve it. We are providing some minimum humanitarian aid for the people of Nicaragua, who've suffered so much. 
I think that our posture in Nicaragua is a proper one. I do not attribute at all the change in Nicaragua to Cuba. I think the people of Nicaragua have got enough judgment to make their own decisions, and we will use our efforts in a proper fashion without interventionism, to let the Nicaraguans let their voice be heard in shaping their own affairs


Bardstown, Kentucky Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
July 31, 1979

It would not help us to violate ourcommitment to Panama, to have the Soviet Union and Cuba come in and try to change that government into a Communist government. Since we ratified the Panama Canal treaties, the Panamanians have had a free election; they have chosen 500-and-something members of their Congress. The Congress members have chosen a brand new President, and Panama is on the road now toward a true democracy.



Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
August 10, 1979	

The other thing I'd like to say is that we have an international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation study that we initiated in the economic summit conference in London in 1977. Its report will be completed this year. It's been a report evolved by the representatives of more than 50 nations, including the Soviet Union, South Africa, all of the Western allies and so forth. And I would guess that when this report is completed that it would be at the forefront of our agenda when we have our economic summit conference next year in Venice



Plains, Georgia Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
August 31, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Secretary Vance is going to make a statement in Washington about that today. I've discussed it with him this morning. I think I'll let his statement stand. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I'll let Secretary Vance's statement stand today, Sam [Sam Donaldson, ABC News]. 
THE PRESIDENT. That's right. 
THE PRESIDENT. I understand. Secretary Vance and I've discussed it, and he'll make a statement today for me
THE PRESIDENT. I'm not going to answer questions about Cuba. I'm going to let Secretary Vance make the statement. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. Let's let the Cuban thing be handled by the State Department. I've instructed them what to say, and I think it's best to let them say it.

Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With a Group of Editors. 
September 7, 1979

It is a coincidence that we have already had a major announcement on the deployment of the MX missile in a mobile form this morning, and in just a few minutes, about 4 o'clock, I will make a statement to the Nation concerning the Soviet troops in Cuba.1 
I've talked to Dr. Brzezinski since he met with you and have read a transcript of his answers and your questions concerning those troops


Soviet Combat Troops in Cuba Remarks to Reporters
September 7, 1979

I want to take a few minutes to speak to you about the presence of the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba. The facts relating to this issue have been carefully laid out by Secretary Vance, both in his public statement and in his testimony before the Congress. The facts, in brief, are as follows: 
We have concluded, as the consequences of intensified intelligence efforts, that a Soviet combat unit is currently stationed in Cuba. We have some evidence to indicate that such a unit has been in Cuba fox- some time, perhaps for quite a few years. 
The brigade consists of 2,000 to 3,000 troops. It's equipped with conventional weapons, such as about 40 tanks and some field artillery pieces, and has conducted training as an organized unit. 
It is not an assault force. It does not have airlift or sea-going capabilities and does not have weapons capable of attacking the United States. 
The purpose of this combat unit is not yet clear. However, the Secretary of State spoke for me and for our Nation on Wednesday when he said that we consider the presence of a Soviet combat brigade in Cuba to be a very serious matter and that this status quo is notacceptable. 
We are confident about our ability to defend our country or any of our friends from external aggression. The issue posed is of a different nature. It involves the stationing of Soviet combat troops here in the Western Hemisphere, in a country which acts as a Soviet proxy in military adventures in other areas of the world, like Africa. 
We do have theright to insist that the Soviet Union respect our interests and our concerns if the Soviet Union expects us to respect their sensibilities and their concerns. Otherwise, relations between our two countries will inevitably be adversely affected. We are seriously pursuing this issue with the Soviet Union, and we are consulting closely with the Congress. 
Let me emphasize that this is a sensitive issue that faces our Nation, all of us, and our Nation as a whole must respond not only with firmness and strength but also with calm and a sense of proportion. 
This is a time for firm diplomacy, not panic and not exaggeration. As Secretary Vance discusses this issue with Soviet representatives in the coming days, the Congress and the American people can help to ensure a successful outcome of these discussions and negotiations by preserving an atmosphere in which our diplomacy can work. 
I know I speak for the leadership in Congress, with whom I have met this afternoon, as well as for my own administration, when I express my confidence that our Nation can continue to show itself to be calm and steady, as well as strong and firm.

Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters. 
September 21, 1979

The House and the Senate have many other items to consider—the Senate, obviously, involving itself with consideration of SALT. The Cuban-Russian troop item has been a matter of extra concern for us the last 2 or 3 weeks, and the size of the defense budget is being negotiated with the Senators. This is just a range of subjects that we have in legislation

THE PRESIDENT. I think it's better for me not to talk at this moment about specifics on that. 
Secretary Vanee made a statement, which I later followed and basically repeated, that, I think, goes as far as I want to go as far as a President. I said this was a matter of great concern to us, that the status quo was notacceptable, and that we would be working with the Soviet Union to change the situation in a manner that would be acceptable to us. If this effort should be unsuccessful, then I would have to take appropriate action. And I think to go into further detail than that would be inappropriate. 
We are meeting with the Soviet Union, assessing our intelligence data, understanding clearly what is the status quo, and I'll have to make a judgment on what to do about it within the near future



New York City, New York Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting With Residents of the Borough of Queens. 
September 25, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. First of all, let me say that this is not the same thing as the 1962 missile crisis. At that time, the Soviets had within Cuba missiles, that could reach our own Nation, that had nuclear warheads. There was a direct threat to our country, and millions of people could have been killed from those launching pads. Our country was threatened with an offensive attack. 
The present brigade of Soviet troops in Cuba is not a threat to the security of our country. There are about 2,500 troops there. They do have 40 tanks and a few field pieces; they have no offensive weapons that can reach our shores. They have no capability for a seaborne invasion; they have no capability for an airborne invasion. So, it's not a threat to our security. 
The thing that concerns us, however-and this is a serious matter, and the status quo is notacceptable to us—is that it's a combat unit. The Soviets deny it has combat status. But it is a combat unit located in a country in this hemisphere, in a country that is totally dependent on the Soviet Union. 
Cuba, in effect, is a puppet of the Soviet Union, and they act completely in accordance with Soviet foreign policy. A hundred percent of all their weapons are given to them by the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union gives Cuba about $8 million every day to sustain it economically. They pay five times the world price, for instance, for all Cuba's sugar. They provide them with all their oil. And in response to that or in trade for that, Cuba acts, in effect, as a Soviet surrogate in many nations around the world. 
In 1975, as you know, they moved thousands of troops into Angola. Since I've been President, they've moved thousands of troops into Ethiopia. They have troops in many other countries in Africa. So, because of the combination of Soviet support and Cuba acting as a Soviet puppet, this does create a great concern for us. There is, however, no threat to our Nation's security. 
We are now trying, through diplomacy, to get the Soviets to eliminate the combat nature of this unit, and I don't know yet whether we will succeed. If we do not succeed, we will take appropriate action to change the status quo
THE PRESIDENT. I would rather not spell out at this point what we will do. 
There are two ways to change the status quo. One is by the action of the Soviet Union. If the Soviets fail to act, then the other way to change the status quo is by action on the part of the United States. And I will report to the Nation, probably within the next week, after we get through with our negotiations with the Soviet Union, what action I will take. But it would not be appropriate tonight for me to give you the details of what we might do.
THE PRESIDENT. You put me in the position of defending the Soviet Union, which I have no inclination to do. [Laughter] But let me say this: There have been troops in Cuba for a long time. 
THE PRESIDENT. In 1962 there were 22,000 troops in Cuba. Evidence is that ever since that time, there have been substantial numbers of Soviet troops in Cuba. 
We, this year, began to monitor that situation much more closely. In the past Cuba was not a high priority for us to monitor with our surveillance systems on a concentrated basis. We were looking at the Soviet Union to make sure they complied with the provisions of SALT I; we were monitoring Vietnam during that war, and we, this year, earlier, focused our attention more on Cuba to monitor what the Soviet troops were doing. My judgment is that the number of Soviet troops is less now than it was in 1963, for instance, months after all the missiles had been moved out of Cuba in October, I believe, of 1962. 
The question is whether this is a combat unit—we're convinced it is—and whether that combat status should change. I might point out to you that the United States :has troops in several countries around the world, some of them very close to the borders of the Soviet Union. This is part of a normal interrelationship between major powers, like ours, and the Soviet Union. We have troops in South Korea, we have troops in Japan, we have a few troops in Turkey, we have had some troops in Iran, and so forth. And so, this is not a new thing. 
But we want the Soviets to understand that the American people are exceptionally sensitive about Soviet combat troops in this hemisphere, particularly in a country like Cuba, which acts, in effect, as an arm of the Soviets in adventurism and intervention in other countries. 
How to deal with this successfully is not an easy task, but we'll do the best we can. And I believe that you will be satisfied when I make my report to the country within the next week.



Peace and National Security Address to the Nation on Soviet Combat Troops in Cuba and the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty. 
October 1, 1979

This evening, I also want to report to you about the highly publicized Soviet brigade in Cuba and about its bearing on the important relationship between our Nation and the Soviet Union

Recently, we obtained evidence that a Soviet combat brigade has been in Cuba for several years. The presence of Soviet combat troops in Cuba is of serious concern to us. 
I want to reassure you at the outset that we do not face any immediate, concrete threat that could escalate into war or a major confrontation—but we do face a challenge. It is a challenge to our wisdom, a challenge to our ability to act in a firm, decisive way without destroying the basis for cooperation that helps to maintain world peace and control nuclear weapons. It's a challenge to our determination to give a measured and effective response to Soviet competition and to Cuban military activities around the world. 
Now let me explain the specific problem of the Soviet brigade and describe the more general problem of Soviet-Cuban military activism in the Third World. 
Here is the background on Soviet forces in Cuba: As most of you know, 17 years ago in the era of the cold war, the Soviet Union suddenly attempted to introduce offensive nuclear missiles and bombers into Cuba. This direct threat to the United States ended with the Soviet agreement to withdraw those nuclear weapons and a commitment not to introduce offensive weapons into Cuba thereafter. 
At the time of that 1962 missile crisis, there were more than 20,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba. Most of them were withdrawn, and we monitored their departure. It was believed that those who stayed behind were not combat forces, but were there to advise and train Cubans and to perform intelligence functions. 
Just recently, American intelligence obtained persuasive evidence that some of these Soviet forces had been organized into a combat unit. When attention was then focused on a careful review of past intelligence data, it was possible for our experts to conclude that this unit had existed for several years, probably since the mid-1970's, and possibly even longer. 
This unit appears to be a 'brigade of two or three thousand men. It is armed with about 40 tanks and other modem military equipment. It's been organized as a combat unit. Its training exercises have been those of a combat unit. 
This is not a large force, nor an assault force. It presents no direct threat to us. It has no airborne or seaborne capability. In contrast to the 1962 crisis, no nuclear threat to the United States is involved. 
Nevertheless, this Soviet brigade in Cuba is a serious matter. It contributes to tension in the Caribbean and the Central American region. The delivery of modern arms to Cuba and the presence of Soviet naval forces in Cuban waters have strengthened the Soviet-Cuban military relationship. They've added to the fears of some countries that they may come under Soviet or Cuban pressure. 
During the last few years, the Soviets have been increasing the delivery of military supplies to Cuba. The result is that Cuba now has one of the largest, best equipped armed forces in this region. These military forces are used to intrude into other countries in Africa and the Middle East. 
There's a special relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union. The Cubans get their weapons free; other Soviet satellite countries have to pay for their military supplies. The Communist regime in Cuba is an economic failure that cannot sustain itself. The Soviet Union must send to Cuba about $8 million in economic aid every day. 
Fidel Castro does not pay money for Soviet arms; the Cuban people pay a much higher price. In every international dispute, on every international issue, the Cuban regime automatically follows the Soviet line. The Soviet brigade is a manifestation of Moscow's dominance of Cuba. It raises the level of that dominance, and it raises the level of responsibility that the Soviet Union must take for escalating Cuban military actions abroad. 
Now I want to report further on what we are doing to resolve these problems and to counter these activities. 
Over the past 3 weeks, we've discussed this issue at great length with top Soviet officials. We've made it clear that the presence of a Soviet combat unit in Cuba is a matter of serious concern to us. 
The Soviet Union does not admit that the unit in question is a combat unit. However, the Soviets have made certain statements to us with respect to our concern: that the unit in question is a training center, that it does nothing more than training and can do nothing more; that they will not change its function or status as a training center. We understand this to mean that they do not intend to enlarge the unit or to give it additional capabilities. 
They have said that the Soviet personnel in Cuba are not and will not be a threat to the United States or to any other nation; that they reaffirm the 1962 understanding and the mutually agreed upon confirmation in 1970 and will abide by it in the future. We, for our part, reconfirm this understanding. 
These assurances have been given to me from the highest level of the Soviet Government. 
Although we have persuasive evidence that the unit has been a combat brigade, the Soviet statements about the future noncombat status of the unit are significant. However, we shall not rest on these Soviet statements alone. 
First, we will monitor the status of the Soviet forces by increased surveillance of Cuba. 
Second, we will assure that no Soviet unit in Cuba can be used as a combat force to threaten the security of the United States or any other nation in this hemisphere. Those nations can, be confident that the United States will act in response to a request for assistance to meet any such threat from Soviet or Cuban forces. 
This policy is consistent with our responsibilities as a member of the Organization of American States and a party to the Rio Treaty. It's a reaffirmation in new circumstances of John F. Kennedy's declaration in 1963 "that we would notpermit any troops from Cuba to move off the island of Cuba in an offensive action against any neighboring countries." 
Third, I'm establishing a permanent, full-time Caribbean joint task force headquarters at Key West, Florida. I will assign to this headquarters forces from all the military services responsible for expanded planning and for conducting exercises. This headquarters unit will employ designated forces for action if required. This will substantially improve our capability to monitor and to respond rapidly to any attempted military encroachment in this region. 
Fourth, we will expand military maneuvers in the region. We will conduct these exercises regularly from now on. In accordance with existing treaty fights, the United States will, of course, keep our forces in Guantanamo. 
Fifth, we will increase our economic assistance to alleviate the unmet economic and human needs in the Caribbean region and further to ensure the ability of troubled peoples to resist social turmoil and possible Communist domination. 
We are enhancing our intelligence capability in order to monitor Soviet and Cuban military activities—both in Cuba and throughout the world. We will increase our efforts to guard against damage to our crucial intelligence sources and our methods of collection, without impairing civil and constitutional rights. 
I have concluded that the brigade issue is certainly no reason for a return to the cold war. A confrontation might be emotionally satisfying for a few days or weeks for some people, but it would be destructive to the national interest and to the security of the United States. 
My fellow Americans, the greatest danger to American security tonight is certainly not the two or three thousand Soviet troops in Cuba. The greatest danger to all the nations of the world—including the United States and the Soviet Union—is the breakdown of a common effort to preserve the peace and the ultimate threat of a nuclear war. I renew my call to the Senate of the United States to ratify the SALT II treaty. 
The purpose of the SALT II treaty and the purpose of my actions in dealing with Soviet and Cuban military relationship are exactly the same—to keep our Nation secure and to maintain a world at peace. 

The President's News Conference
October 9, 1979
In my opinion, we have answered the question of the Soviet combat unit in Cuba adequately. I think we've isolated any threat from that unit. We'll increase our surveillance there, and I believe that this obviously has been an important issue for us to address. I believe it's been addressed adequately

THE PRESIDENT. The troops in Cuba have been there for a long time. I've not read Secretary Kissinger's speech; I've read news reports of it. Its basic premises are compatible with my own: that the presence of a Soviet combat unit there is a serious matter, which I think we have addressed as best we could; secondly, that this is not the most important matter of all, that above and beyond that, it's important to recognize and to do what we can to contain Cuban interventionism or adventurism around the world. As you know, this began primarily with the entrance of more than a 10,000 body of troops from Cuba into Angola in 1975, before I was President. 
We do look upon this as a major threat. I have not seen any reports that Secretary Kissinger recommended different moves from the ones that I outlined to the Nation on the evening of October 1. So, we do share a common concern. I think that our response was measured and appropriate. I do not favor the Soviets extending their arm of influence to the Cubans or anyone else around the world


San Diego, California Remarks at the Annual Convention of the Building and Construction Trades Department, AFL-CIO. 
October 11, 1979

We are a nation that believes in freedom, individuality, liberty, democracy; the Soviets don't believe in those things. We think a person should never be subjugated to the state; the Soviets put the state first. We are a nation with deep ethical standards and religious beliefs; the Soviets are an atheistic nation. We believe in therights of other countries; the Soviets inject themselves directly or through Cuban surrogates into the internal affairs of other countries and disrupt the societies there


"Ask the President" Remarks During a Telephone Call-out Program on National Public Radio
October 13, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I can assure you of that. We have a perfect right to be in Guantanamo and to have a military base there. This is in accordance, Jeanette, with a 1903 treaty. This treaty was reconfirmed by the Cuban Government in 1934, and after Fidel Castro became the head of the Cuban Government, he reconfirmed to us theright of the United States to have this small military base. From time to time, as a matter of routine military maneuvers, we've put in more troops there for a few days or a few weeks and then take them out just to practice on military affairs, as is common for all nations on Earth. 
There is no prospect for a war or for conflict or for combat. It's a very safe thing to do. We're going to stay in Guantanamo in accordance with our negotiated rights, and there need be no concern on your part



Dolton, Illinois Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
October 16, 1979

We are not at war with Cuba. We have no intention of being antagonistic toward the people of Cuba. The fact is that Cuba's policies, within their own nation and relating to other countries, make them a very difficult government to recognize officially. Also, they are almost completely subservient to the Soviet Government. They're kind of a surrogate of the Soviets. The Cubans have over 45,000 troops in countries overseas where, in my opinion, they have absolutely no business. It's the most highly militarized country on Earth per capita. 
They are constantly interfering in the affairs of adjacent countries or other people, for instance, Puerto Rico. The Puerto Rican people voluntarily choose the form of government they want. They are now a commonwealth of our country. They may prefer to be a State, the 51st State; they may prefer to be independent. Whatever the Puerto Rican people want suits me fine. Castro is constantly trying to stir up the people of Puerto Rico to seek independence from the United States, which the Puerto Rican people do not want. He points out the advantages of independence. But when people leave one country and go to another, the people leave Cuba and go to find a better life in Puerto Rico. 
I think we've got to have a firm policy on Cuba. 
The last point is this: There's no way that Cuba could survive economically, with their Communist experiment 90 miles from our country, without the Soviets propping them up. Every day the Soviet Union sends to Castro $8 million just to keep the Cuban people alive economically and to keep Castro in power. And they send them large quantities of arms, military weapons—and don't even charge Cuba for it. All the other satellite countries in Eastern Europe, for instance, when they get arms from the Soviet Union, they have to pay for it. 
So, I believe that until Cuba can bring their own troops back from unwarranted involvement in the internal affairs of other countries, until they release the hundreds and hundreds, even thousands of political prisoners they have in jail-and some of them have been there over 20 years—and until they stop interfering in the internal affairs of countries, even in this hemisphere, we will not recognize Cuba. After that, we'll consider it


