MID 222801, US v USSR, 13 mar to 12-Apr-81 to 14-May-81



Exchange With Reporters in New York, New York 
March 14, 1981

The President. So far we see nothing, no evidence that this isn't just their exercise, the games


Remarks at the National Conference of the Building and Construction Trades Department, AFL-CIO
March 30, 1981

Since 1970 the Soviet Union has undergone a massive military buildup, far outstripping any need for defense. They've spent $300 billion more than we have for military forces resulting in a significant numerical advantage in strategic nuclear delivery systems, tactical aircraft, submarines, artillery, and anti-aircraft defense. And to allow this defense or this imbalance to continue is a threat to our national security. It's my duty as President, and all of our responsibility as citizens, to keep this country strong enough to remain free.



Remarks on the Meeting Between Secretary of State Haig and the NATO Foreign Ministers 
May 6, 1981

I think that we have a better relationship with our NATO allies now and resolved many points of difference that might have existed there and erased their worries about our relationship with the Soviet Union.


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki of Japan 
May 7, 1981

We in America are grateful for the strong measures that you have taken to penalize the Soviet Union for its violent aggression in Afghanistan. You have come to the aid of countries resisting Soviet expansion. You have rescued refugees, imposed sanctions against tyrants, and offered economic assistance to the oppressed. The people of Japan stand with Americans, Europeans, and people of other democracies in a community of free powers. But even in this world community of leadership, Japan and the United States stand out in their achievements


Toasts of the President and Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki of Japan at the State Dinner 
May 7, 1981

Energy supplies are uncertain. Economies are fragile. The Soviet Union continues its aggression, and the dynamics of the Persian Gulf are precarious. And the United States will play an active role in addressing these challenges, and we welcome Japan's determination to participate as a full partner in behalf of world peace. Just as we will count on Japan, Japan can count on America



