MID 224401, US v North Korea, 3 dec 1953 to 2-Jan-54 to 10-Nov-56


9 - The President's News Conference
January 13, 1954

THE PRESIDENT. No. 
Now, the first thing that comes to my mind is--some of the details of that truce agreement now, of course, slip my mind; but, of course, in general the evidence is they have reduced their ground forces, taking out some of them. They have done a very great deal of digging and producing strong defensive lines. They have done a very large amount, a surprisingly large amount, in economic rebuilding in North Korea, apparently treating the North Korean area almost like it was an economic adjunct or part of the land across the Yalu. But as far as actual buildup, I would say, aside from building of certain things that might have a military usefulness, there is no evidence of that kind



161 - The President's News Conference
July 7, 1954

Today we have Red China going to Geneva, and instead of taking a conciliatory attitude about anything, it excoriated the United Nations. As a matter of fact, at Geneva it demanded repudiation of the United Nations position. On top of that, Red China is today at war with the United Nations. They were declared an aggressor by the United Nations in the Assembly; that situation has never been changed. They are occupying North Korea; they have supported this great effort at further enslavement of the peoples in Indochina; they have held certain of our prisoners unjustifiably, and they have been guilty of the employment of the worst possible diplomatic deportment in the international affairs of the world



168 - The President's News Conference
July 21, 1954

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course, Korea is not in southeast Asia. 
Already we have, you know, a treaty of mutual defense with Korea. It has been enacted, it has been approved, by the Senate. 
Now, as I understand it, when the Korean war started, the purpose of the United Nations was to prevent any advance by force into South Korea; they did do that. 
I know of no one that has ever proposed that we go to war to free North Korea. 
As it is, it is an unsatisfactory situation, exactly as exists in Germany, and now apparently is going to exist in part of Indochina. 
These are very unsatisfactory situations and, to my mind, will always give reason for aggravating situations that are difficult, at best. But there is no thought on the part of any of us to start an aggressive move for the freeing of that country


171 - Toasts of the President and President Rhee of Korea at the White House.
July 26, 1954

It has been a great source of pride to Americans that, with her other allies of the Western World, we could join with Korea in seeing that that country should not be overrun by the invading hordes from the north



347 - The President's News Conference
December 8, 1954

Now, we know that Chinese forces were fighting in Northern Korea, and we know that we lost prisoners of war who, by the open admission, published admissions, of the Chinese Government, were in uniform and were properly carrying out legitimate missions at the time of their capture



18 - The President's News Conference
January 19, 1955

You will recall there were 25,000 prisoners escaped--North Koreans. They escaped into South Korea, and this created a very great difficulty at the time of the armistice negotiations. 
Now, we thought we were right, but what did the other side think?




59 - The President's News Conference
March 23, 1955

No. I am merely giving these indications of something that would mean to me, "Look, these people are talking business." They have violated their word so often, they have left us hanging on the limb. As a matter of fact, our great interest in all of these past agreements and papers is why did we trust them so much. 
All I want to know is what can I depend on to mean to me this: we are approaching this seriously and earnestly; that is all.




185 - The President's News Conference
August 4, 1955

Now, several times I have stated that as long as Red China is branded as a dictator by the United Nations, which it still is, due to the fact that its armies are in North Korea, we have no choice of our own, and I don't know how the United Nations has a choice of its own. There are other outstanding complaints which I have outlined time and again, and I have no idea that under existing circumstances there would be a change of the kind you indicated in our policy















