MID 222701, US v USSR, 5 mar to 4-Apr-80 to 4-May-80



Visit of Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of the Federal Republic of Germany Remarks to Reporters Following a Meeting
March 5, 1980

We have been particularly involved together in recent months, after the American hostages were seized in Iran and since the Soviets have invaded Afghanistan. The Federal Republic of Germany has made its position clear both in the United Nations on several occasions, in these private consultations, and through their public actions.


Visit of Chancellor Schmidt of the Federal Republic of Germany Toasts at the State Dinner. 
March 5, 1980

Later, of course, I think Helmut was the first one to recognize the growing threat to Western Europe and to the NATO alliance of the unpublicized buildup of Soviet theater nuclear weapons. And he presented the case very clearly to the rest of us, and we began to study this issue more thoroughly. And eventually he exerted again his strong leadership in Western Europe to encourage our allies to work with us in committing ourselves jointly to meet this threat in a carefully planned, moderate, but effective way, not to cause an escalation in tension or an escalation in division among us, but to cause us to address the question in the most effective possible fashion. 
We recognize that there are serious threats to stability and that we have come, in this last few years, to value highly the benefits of detente and to recognize clearly that in spite of all of our other possible diversion of issues that are important, the control of weaponry and the control of nuclear weaponry must be at the top of our agenda. These commitments have been shaken, but not changed, by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. 
We are still committed to detente. We are still committed to avoid a resumption of the cold war. We are still committed to the control of nuclear and conventional weapons: We are still committed to cooperation among nations on Earth. We are still committed to stability and to peace. And we are still committed to making sure that every action we take to alleviate crises is a peaceful action and is a constructive action that will help to achieve our goals without violating these deep commitments and principles on which our Nation's policies have been founded


White House Briefing on Administration Policies Remarks to a Group of Civic and Community Leaders From New York. 
March 11, 1980

A second foreign affairs matter which concerns me very deeply is the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. I know Dr. Brzezinski has talked to you earlier. But this is a major challenge to world stability, to world peace, and ultimately to our own security. This invasion of Afghanistan directly threatens one of the most vital and strategically important regions of the world. 
Every action that I have taken has been designed to preserve peace, and every action I have taken has been peaceful in nature. We obviously have a wide range of options—economic, political, military-but we've chosen to exercise only those economic and political options that would preserve the support of other nations on Earth, keep our Nation at peace, and not violate, again, our principles or our best interests. 
It is a delicate situation. We are resolved to stand firm, and I think we've made good progress, because 103 other nations in addition to us have condemned the Soviet invasion, called for the immediate withdrawal of the Soviet troops from Afghanistan. And, of course, the Moslem countries, many of whom have been dependent upon the Soviet Union or closely allied with the Soviet Union, have also joined in a much stronger condemnation of what the Soviets did


The President's News Conference
March 14, 1980
THE PRESIDENT. The agreement which we presently have with the Soviet Union, which I intend to honor as long as they reciprocate, is to comply with all the terms of the interim SALT agreement, which is known as SALT I. 
SALT II has been signed by me and President Brezhnev. I consider it binding on our two countries. It has not yet been ratified. We will observe very closely to make sure that the Soviets comply with this agreement. I will not ask the Senate to ratify SALT II until I have a chance to consult very closely with the congressional leadership on the Senate side, particularly Majority Leader Byrd and others who work with him, both Democrats and Republicans. 
Because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan it is obvious that we would not be successful in ratifying SALT II treaty at this time. It is still on the calendar. It will not be brought up until after that consultation takes place. I will also continue to consult with congressional leadership as far as compliance with SALT II is concerned. 
But my present intention, within the bounds of reciprocal action on the Soviet Union and consultations with the Senate and, to some degree, the House leadership, I intend to comply with the provisions of SALT II. 
THE PRESIDENT. Ordinarily, when a treaty is signed between the heads of two nations, the presumption is that the treaty will be honored on both sides absent some further development. One further development that would cause me to renounce the treaty would be after consulting with the Members of the Senate to determine an interest of our Nation that might cause such a rejection, in which case I would notify the Soviet Union that the terms of the treaty were no longer binding. 
So, there will be two provisos in the continued honoring of the SALT II treaty. One is that the Soviets reciprocate completely, as verified by us, and secondly, that the consultations that I will continue with the Senate leadership confirm me in my commitment that it's in the best interests of our country to do so.



Sanctions Against Iran Remarks Announcing U.S. Actions. 
April 7, 1980

Second, the Secretary of the Treasury will put into effect official sanctions prohibiting exports from the United States to Iran, in accordance with the sanctions approved by 10 members of the United Nations Security Council on January 13 in the resolution which was vetoed by the Soviet Union. Although shipment of food and medicine were not included in the U.N. Security Council vote, it is expected that exports even of these items to Iran will be minimal or nonexistent


Caribbean/Central American Action Remarks at a White House Reception. 
April 9, 1980

The exploitation of dissatisfaction and the desire for change is a recognized fact. These factors have created an open avenue for Cuban adventurism—a Cuba supported by and encouraged by, financed by the Soviet Union. We tend to misunderstand the threat of Cuba. Certainly they contribute to violence and instability in the Caribbean region, but the real threat of Cuba is that they claim to offer a model to be emulated by people who are dissatisfied with their own lot or who are struggling to change things for the better. Cuba's promise, as you well know, is an empty one, just as Cuba's claimed independence is a myth. The inability of Cuban leaders to breathe one critical word of Soviet imperialism, even refraining from criticizing the Soviets' actual invasion of Afghanistan, shows a total absence of independence on the part of Cuba. 
As you know, the Soviets prop up Cuba's bankrupt economy with an infusion of several millions of dollars every day. Moreover, Cuba is the only nation on Earth, I believe, that is more dependent on one major commodity now than it was 20 years ago. The stagnation there is debilitating indeed. And we see the hunger of many people on that island to escape political deprivation of freedom and also economic adversity. Our heart goes out to the almost 10,000 freedom-loving Cubans who entered a temporarily opened gate at the Peruvian Embassy just within this week


American Society of Newspaper Editors Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the Society's Annual Convention. 
April 10, 1980

If interference from outside is a threat, the threat does not come from the United States. The challenge in that area of the world—as in some others—comes from the intersection of two historic trends. One is the rising demand for development and for self-determination which is felt, and deeply felt, throughout what we call the Third World. The United States responds with sympathy to that demand. The other trend is Soviet expansionism, which we are determined to oppose. 
In 1946 the United States stood firm against Soviet occupation of northern Iran, against Soviet-sponsored subversion in Greece, against Soviet demands on Turkey. Historically, American strength has been used to help the countries of the Persian Gulf area to protect their stability and to retain their own sovereignty. 
The reality of the world today is that Moscow exploits unrest, not to address the discontent that underlies that unrest, not to overcome the inequalities that give rise to unrest, but to expand its own dominion and to satisfy its imperial objectives. 
In Afghanistan, the Soviet Union has revealed for the world the hypocrisy of its courtship of the Third World. It has shown that it will not be deterred by principle or decency or by international law or by world public opinion or by the opposition of freedom-loving and patriotic Afghanis. And it has made this known in a region which is at once politically volatile and economically crucial. 
The subjugation of Afghanistan represents the first direct intrusion of Soviet armed forces beyond the borders of the Warsaw Pact nations since the Second World War. The explosiveness of this region, its great natural wealth, and the Soviet willingness to use the armed forces which have been developed during the Kremlin's enormous military buildup during the last 15 years are what combine to make the invasion of Afghanistan so unsettling to the future of international peace.
In Southwest Asia, unstable and uncontrollable forces are at work. The Soviets have, with their invasion, disturbed these forces of historic, religious, economic, and ethnic conflict that are beyond the control of the Soviets and that could lead to much more serious direct confrontation with other nations who have vitalinterests in this region. 
Nor can the world turn away from the harsh truth that the occupation of Afghanistan is marked by appalling inhumanity. We must not forget and our allies and other nations must not forget that today, at this moment, every day, the Soviet Union is violating human standards of decency and violating human rights in the grossest kind of way. Hundreds of Afghan freedom fighters are dying every week, some in brutal mass executions. Entire villages are being wiped out. More than 800,000 people have fled the country. Terror tactics, including the use of chemical weapons, are the trademark of the ruthless attempt to crush Moslem resistance and to install a Soviet form of peace—a peace of brutal armed suppression. 
Earlier this year, 103 other members of the United Nations joined us in condemning the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and demanding the immediate withdrawal of the invading forces. Soviet citizens have never been informed of this United Nations action. This unprecedented condemnation was significant, but because of the principle at stake, because of the nation's importance to Western security, because of the savagery of the Soviet assault, which continues till now, and because of the Soviet Union's use of its own troops directly in such a conflict, it's imperative that we continue to meet the challenge of the invasion with calm and unshakable resolution. 
The measures that I've ordered are designed to enhance peace. They include the embargo on further grain sales, tightened controls on high technology trade, limitations of fishing in United States waters, strengthening of our naval presence in the Indian Ocean, intensification of our development of rapid deployment forces and our capacity to deploy them and to use them, and our offer to assist states in the region to maintain their own security. These are necessarysteps on a course which we must and we will persist. 
We cannot know with certainty the motivations of the Soviet move into Afghanistan, whether Afghanistan is the purpose or the prelude. Regardless of its motives, there can be no doubt that the Soviet invasion poses an increased threat to the independence of nations in the region and to the world's access to vital resources and to vital sealanes. 
But our interest in peace and stability in the region goes far beyond economics. We cannot wish away the fact that conflict and tension in the region could endanger the broader peace. And if the invasion of Afghanistan does indeed foreshadow a pattern of Soviet behavior, then for the coming years Americans must accept the truth that we are in for challenging and very difficult times. In this ever more interdependent world, to assume that aggression need be met only when it occurs at one's own doorstep is to tempt new adventures and to risk new and very serious miscalculations. Our course is clear. By responding firmly, we intend to halt aggression where it takes place and to deter it elsewhere. 
Let me underline for you this most vital point in our policy. America and Americans are not motivated by relentless hostility, by a desire for indiscriminate confrontation or a return to the cold war. But for America simply to accept Soviet occupation and domination of Afghanistan as an accomplished fact would be a cynical signal to the world that could only encourage further aggression, further tension, and further danger to world peace. It is America's responsibility to register, and register in concrete terms, our condemnation of the Soviet invasion for as long as that invasion continues. 
It is extremely important that we not in any way condone Soviet aggression. We must recall the experience of 1936, the year of the Berlin Olympic games. They were used to inflate the prestige of an ambitious dictator, Adolf Hitler, to show Germany's totalitarian strength to the world in the sports arena as it was being used to cow the world on the banks of the Rhine. 
The parallel with the site and timing of the 1980 Olympics is striking. Let me call your attention to one compelling similarity between the Nazi view of the 1936 Olympics as a propaganda victory and the official Soviet view of the 1980 summer games. I'd like to read to you a passage from this year's edition of the "Handbook for Party Militants," issued in Moscow for Soviet Party activists, and I quote: 
"The ideological struggle between East and West is directly involved in the selection of the cities where the Olympic games take place. The decision to award the honor of holding the Olympic games to the capital of the world's first socialist state is convincing testimony of the general recognition of the historic importance and correctness of the foreign policy course of our country, and of the enormous service of the Soviet Union in the struggle for peace."
Let me repeat a part of that: 
"The decision to award the honor of holding the Olympic games to the capital of the world's first socialist state is convincing testimony of the general recognition of the historic importance and correctness of the foreign policy course of our country, and of the enormous services of the Soviet Union in the struggle for peace." 
A few weeks ago I met with American athletes in the White House. I explained the Soviet stake in the Olympics and the moral and political reasons why the United States will not send a team to the Moscow games. I understand the sacrifice that has been asked from these men and women for the sake of the security of their country and their world; the Soviet leaders certainly understand it. But for our not sending a team to Moscow, this is far more than a symbolic gesture; it's a direct repudiation—in the phrase of their own propaganda handbook— of the "correctness" of their foreign policy. 
Under Olympic principles—and this is very important—athletes represent their nations. Athletes who are not part of a national team cannot compete in the Olympics. The United States does not wish to be represented in a host country that is invading and subjugating another nation in direct violation of human decency and international law. If legal actionsarenecessary to enforce the decision not to send a team to Moscow, then I will take those legal actions. 
All of these decisions do require sacrifice, and I've acted to assure that the burdens of those sacrifices are shared as equally as possible among all Americans. The American people have demonstrated that they are willing to bear their share of the burden, but it is also vital that the burden of sacrifice be shared among our allies and among other nations. 
Neither we nor our allies want to destroy the framework of East-West relations that has yielded concrete benefits to so many people. But ultimately, if we continue to seek the benefit of detente while ignoring the necessity for deterrence, we would lose the advantages of both. 
It is essential that our intentions be absolutely clear. The measures we've taken against the Soviet Union since the invasion will remain in effect until there is total withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Then, and only then, we would be prepared to join with Afghanistan and her neighbors in a guarantee of the true neutrality and noninterference in Afghanistan's internal affairs. We support the restoration of a neutral, nonaligned Afghanistan, with a government that would be responsive to the needs and the wishes of the people of that country. 
Although the Soviets have talked about the withdrawal of their troops, they have actually shown no interest in such proposals. There are no signs at this time of a Soviet withdrawal. As a matter of fact, within this last week, we have proof that the Soviets are moving additional troop units across the border into Afghanistan. We must be prepared to hold our course and to impose the costs of aggression for as long as this is necessary. We thus face what could be a protracted time of strain in East-West relations. 
To enhance stability as much as possible in this predictable and difficult period, we will continue to maintain a stable military balance, both through our own steady defense modernization and through negotiated arms limits that are equitable and verifiable. This objective-a stable balance—is advanced by the SALT II treaty. 
In a period of heightened tensions, it is all the more important that we have reliable constraints on the competition in strategic nuclear weapons. SALT is an integral part of our national security policy. I remain committed to the ratification of this treaty, and the United States intends to abide by its obligations under international law and to take no action inconsistent with its intent or purpose, so long as the Soviets act with similar restraint. 
The course we pursue, therefore, in this turbulent world is steady, firm, and fair. It's the course of a strong, stable nation practicing mature restraint, but insisting on justice—the policy we pursue in Iran. It's the course of a resolute nation, hopeful of good relations, but determined to deter aggression—the course we pursue in dealing with the Soviet Union. It's the course of the peacemaker—the same role to which the United States is committed in the Middle East and indeed throughout the world. It's the course of an understanding nation, sensitive to the tides of change and to therights and the needs of all people—America's rightful approach, proper approach to the revolutionary climate in which a new world is now coming to life. 
Our mission is to promote order, not to enforce our will. Our mission is to protect our citizens and our national honor, not to harm nor to dishonor others; to compel restraint, not to provoke confrontation; to support the weak, not to dominate them; to assure that the foundations of our new world are laid upon a stable superpower balance, not built on sand. 
This is a worthy mission for a great nation, for a caring people, and for loyal friends. It is the historical mission of the United States of America. And the United States of America will fulfill this mission.
I cannot say that we have proof that the terrorists who hold the hostages in the compound are controlled by the Soviet Union. The Tudeh party in Iran is relatively small in number. In recent months they have been highly supportive of Khomeini and the mullahs and those that are close to him, possibly as a political ploy to seek some better treatment from the Ayatollah Khomeini. 
The Soviets in recent weeks have had a very strong and constant radio propaganda effort going into Iran, expressing their approval of the actions taken by the militants in the compound. We complained to the Soviet Union strongly and repeatedly, and for awhile that propaganda effort was assuaged. In recent days, however, it has built up again.
Options that are available to them if such action is not forthcoming would have to be chosen by those autonomous and independent nations and their leaders. We have suggested such things as the imposition of the sanctions as voted by the U.N. Security Council, blocked legally by the veto of the Soviet Union, and also the withdrawal of their diplomatic personnel from Iran, or possibly the breaking of relations with Iran

THE PRESIDENT. I think the people in the Kremlin would agree completely with what Mr. Reagan has said—that the invasion of Afghanistan was not the fault of, nor the responsibility of, President Brezhnev and the Politburo, but was the responsibility of the President of the United States. That's obviously a ridiculous claim that could only damage our own Nation's prestige, coming from a responsible person, and help the Soviets in their claim that they had adequate provocation from this country to take this unwarranted action

The record is that our Nation has always stood firm and resolved against aggression. The Soviets have used their surrogates to go into nations with troops, ostensibly at the invitation of the host government. This occurred in Angola, as you well know, with Cuban troops, I think in 1975—1976. It has occurred before and since then, when the Soviets invaded Czechoslovakia, when they invaded Hungary, when they took over East Germany, took over Poland. I don't believe that anybody could say that was because the United States was weak or vacillating. We have made steady progress, in my judgment, in expanding the beneficial impact of our Nation throughout the world. 
The Communist government philosophy and what occurs within those nations is not attractive enough to gain adherents without the use of violence or force. It's not an accident that East Germany has a wall built around it. It's not designed to keep people out of East Germany; it's designed to keep people in East Germany. And had the Soviets been successful in selling to one of their neighbors, in Afghanistan, the attractiveness of a totalitarian government under Communism, similar to what exists in Moscow, then they would not have had to put 100,000 troops into an innocent country to subjugate those people and to force them to accept a puppet government. 
This week we have seen in Cuba a bankrupt nation, kept alive economically, by the skin of their teeth, only with the infusion of 3 or 4 million dollars a day from the Soviet Union. When they temporarily opened the gates in the Embassy in [of] Peru, 10,000 Cubans filled that Embassy to escape political persecution and economic deprivation in Cuba
When the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, I decided to exercise the economic and political authority of this country, and not to go to war and to exercise what military resources we have. 
Politically, we went to the United Nations, along with other countries, and in an absolutely unprecedented fashion, an overwhelming portion of the nations of the world, including some nations that are subservient to the Soviet Union or dependent upon the Soviet Union, voted to condemn the Soviets and to callfor the withdrawal of their troops from Afghanistan. Thirty-four Moslem nations-not all of whom are our friends at all, some very closely aligned with the Soviet Union—voted unanimously to condemn the Soviets and demand that the Soviets withdraw. 
I made a speech to the Joint Session of the Congress, State of the Union speech, and spelled out the commitments that we would make to maintain steadily, even if we have to stand alone, the economic constraints, our absence of participation in the Olympics, and so forth. We are inducing—I think we'll have substantial success—other nations to join us in these restraints. 
We go further than other nations, but we are the leader of the world. We're not as vulnerable as some others are to economic or political pressure put on them by the Soviet Union, because of proximity and because of our innate strength. So, I think it's necessary for us to go a little further than the other countries. 
I don't believe there's any doubt in my mind or in most people's minds that a very clear signal has been sent to the Soviet Union: Your action in Afghanistan is condemned; it will notbeaccepted; the status quo will not be revived that existed prior to Afghanistan; and further aggression by you will result in the possible exercise of additional authority and power by the United States and other countries above and beyond economic and political actions

Meeting With Leaders of Ethnic and Fraternal Organizations Remarks During a White House Briefing. 
April 11, 1980

Our country is faced with tests of strength and tests of courage and tests of our national will and national unity on a daily basis. We've been tested lately by the capture and the holding of American hostages in Iran, by the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet troops. We are being tested by the first realization that our Nation does have limits on energy supplies, and we face an unprecedented level of inflation which has swept the world


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters. 
April 11, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I would say superior. But we have a very serious concern about the buildup rate of Soviet military capability over the last 15 years. They have been increasing their expenditures for military capability at an average annual compounded rate of 3 or 4, sometimes 5 percent; whereas up until 1977, our own Nation's expenditure for defense in real terms had been going downward. We now have a commitment, not only in our own country but among our allies, to increase our expenditure for defense in real terms above and beyond the inflation rate. 
It's very difficult to compare our country with the Soviet Union on the number of troops, the number of tanks, the number of planes, and so forth, because it's such a complicated interrelationship. I'll give you a couple of examples. 
One is that when you compare the total number of troops marshaled now for defense in the Western alliance—that is, in NATO—and compare them with the total number of troops marshaled by the Soviet Union, we compare very favorably. I think we have a few more troops. If you only compare American troops with Soviet troops, the Soviets would have more than we. 
In addition, I would say at least a fourth of the Soviet troops and military equipment, weapons, would have to be marshaled along the Chinese border and not devoted to the western border of the Soviet Union looking toward Europe. This is an important consideration that clouds the issue. 
Another one is that the Soviets have probably spent $100 billion in an air defense system for their continental territory. This is an expenditure which we have not made, because we do not think it's necessary. And we also think that the Soviet massive expenditure for this purpose has not been well advised, looking at the situation from their point of view, because we still believe that our upcoming cruise missiles, our present bomber capability could penetrate this air defense system with relative impunity. 
There is another series of questions. We have probably four or five times the economic capability among ourselves and our allies compared to the Soviet Union and its allies. We have almost unbelievably easy access collectively to the oceans, whereas the Soviets have a very narrow access to the oceans in most respects. 
So, I would say that, in balance, on military capability, economic capability, political influence, we are superior to the Soviet Union in every respect. But we have been extremely concerned, to summarize, because the Soviets are building up their military capability so rapidly that we have been in danger of their overtaking us and acquiring, from their perception, from our allies' perception, from my own, and from the world, a superiority, which we are determined to prevent
THE PRESIDENT. It's been effective. We don't know what the Soviets' production will be this year from their winter grain crop and their present highly delayed plantings, but we think it's been very effective. 
The amount of grain that I did prevent being shipped amounted to about 11 million tons. We estimate that about 6 million of those tons 1 have been substituted by the Soviet Union through additional purchases, sometimes at a very highly escalated price. This means that about 11 million tons of grain which the Soviets had counted upon acquiring from us will not be going to the Soviet Union. 
We've done everything we possibly could, as you know, to maintain the stability of the grain markets since the first part of January, when we imposed the restraint on sales to the Soviet Union. We can't guarantee that markets will be frozen indefinitely, no matter what the vicissitudes of the international production and demands might be. Lately the markets have strengthened to some degree. 
We have replaced, through increased sales efforts, a great amount of the grain that would have gone to the Soviet Union. For instance, the first 2 months of this year, after the imposition of the restraints, we had a 36-percent increase in total grain shipments from our Nation above and beyond what we shipped the first 2 months of 1979. And we estimate that we've had more than 10 million tons of additional grain sold, which we had not counted upon being sold prior to the imposition of the partial embargo on shipments to the Soviet Union. 
I would say, therefore, that we have perpetrated against the Soviet Union a substantial reduction in the amount of grain that they are able to acquire, and we have minimized, as best we could, adverse effects on the American grain market. And we have increased and will have another banner, record breaking year in 1980 on total grain exports. 
THE PRESIDENT. As long as the Soviet troops are in Afghanistan.
THE PRESIDENT. That's a difficult thing for us to do or to discuss. The Soviets, I am sure, have been extremely surprised at the tenacity and the courage of the Afghan freedom fighters. 
There's been an extraordinary circumstance there in that there have been heavy defections from the Afghan armed forces by those who favor liberty and freedom more than accepting the subjugation of the Soviet invaders. As they have defected from the Afghan forces, they have taken with them large quantities of weapons and ammunition. This has been a very effective source of supply of weapons for the Afghan people. 
So, my own judgment is that it's proper for us to both conduct and to discuss aid that we are giving to the refugees. And there are now probably 650,000 refugees in Pakistan, out of Afghanistan, and maybe more than 100,000 more in Iran and other countries—maybe a total of 800,000 or more. We can give aid to them and support. But I think the Afghan freedom fighters are doing very well on their own in getting weapons away from their own previous armed forces and also perhaps some from the Soviet invaders. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, in the first place, our country is not invading an adjacent, freedom-loving, deeply religious country to punish them with death and executions and destruction and the deprivation of their independence. That's one difference. 
In addition, I think all the public opinion polls have shown—and this is a secondary matter, but it's significant-that the American people, in addition to the President and the Congress, the American people, by more than a 2-to-1 majority, do not favor an American team going to Moscow and, in effect, giving an imprimatur of approval of Soviet aggression and domination, through aggression, of Afghanistan

Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Foreign Correspondents. 
April 12, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I think the most important aspect of the Iranian and the Afghanistan problems is not the disappointment that we feel with our allies, but the consistency and unanimity that we all share, in this country and in Europe, about the threat to peace that has been put forward, not only by the Soviet aggression in Afghanistan but by the terrorist attack on our Embassy and its officials in Iran. There has been a unanimous condemnation of these two acts as a threat to peace. 
We do need the full and aggressive support of our allies. What we ask specifically of them is that they carry out now two basic proposals. One is to honor the sanctions against Iran that were voted and supported by all of them in the United Nations Security Council earlier this year. The final action of the U.N. Security Council was stopped by a Soviet veto. And secondly, if this should prove to be unsuccessful, then to join us in strong diplomatic moves against Iran, to show them that we all do stand together in this condemnation of terrorism, a threat to our country, to all of them, and particularly the smaller nations who don't have the economic or political or military power to protect its interests
THE PRESIDENT. I didn't know what was going to happen. 2 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we obviously had extremely good intelligence about the placement of Soviet troops around the border of Afghanistan and the Soviet Union. They had been there for a long time-months, even years, some of them. We also knew about the increased Soviet presence in Iran [Afghanistan] of military personnel, in the nature of a few hundred. 
It was only Christmas Eve when a massive airlift began to move strong Soviet troops into the area around Kabul, and it was only a day or two later, as you know, when the Soviets had the leader of Iran [Afghanistan], President Amin, assassinated, along with some of the members of his family. 
This was the first time that the Soviets had used their own very powerful military forces for an invasion of a neighboring country since the Warsaw Pact itself was formed. It was an unprecedented action on their part, therefore, for the last quarter-century.
I have tried since I've been in this office not only to strengthen the constant moral commitment of this Nation and to strengthen that commitment in the part of other nations—human rights, the preservation of democracy, the honoring of international borders, the effectuation of peace among disputing parties—but also to increase our military strength, in NATO and in other places in the world. I think we've been successful in that. 
What is required now, with this gross violation of the principles of detente and this gross violation of human decency and the principles of international law on the part of the Soviet Union, is a clear message to them, unified if possible, that they will notbepermitted to continue this invasion with impunity, that the consequences of their invasion will be very severe for them. 
I had, in the most powerful nation on Earth, the options of acting economically or politically or militarily. We chose to exercise, along with many other nations, a political and economic mute and to hold in reserve stronger action in the future, if necessary, to preserve peace in that troubled region. 
A hundred and four members of the United Nations joined in condemning the Soviet invasion, calling for their withdrawal. They have not withdrawn. As a matter of fact, within the last few days they have moved additional major military units into Afghanistan. They are in direct violation of international law, and they are also threatening the advantages of detente, now and in the future. 
To the extent that the Soviets are convinced not only that the United States is going to take economic action against them but other nations as well will takeaction against the Soviet Union—to that extent we believe that ultimately they will withdraw from Afghanistan. But they have certainly shown no evidence at this stage of any inclination to withdraw their forces. They are steadily building up their forces instead.
We've got a volatile situation in the Persian Gulf-Southwest Asian region underanycircumstances. And for the Soviets to exercise their massive military power to completely subjugate another nation, to kill literally thousands of its people every week, to wipe out villages, is a clear signal to the rest of the world that they have no regard for the advantages of detente and that they are not willing to live in accordance with international law. 
And I believe that unless we let a clear signal go to the Soviet Union that we allies stand united in not only condemnation of this action but that we are going to take firm actions to show the Soviets that they will suffer because of it, that might lead to increasing encroachment by the Soviet Union against other countries. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, the terms are not totally different. It's the Soviet action which has violated moral principles and human decency and international law. It's the Iranian terrorist action which has violated moral decency and international law and human principles. 
So, the relationship between strong moral commitments to human decency and human rights on the one hand and strong and adequate and predictable and sure and steady buildup in our military capability to match an enormous buildup in the Soviet Union are, I think, completely compatible one with another. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think the Soviets would like to avoid any sort of major confrontation with powerful nations like ourselves, including all those represented here. 
The Soviets have shown a consistent inclination to extend its own influence, through violence, into other areas of the world. They've done this primarily through surrogates. 
In Vietnam now, they are encouraging the Vietnamese to invade and to subjugate and to destroy the fabric of the nation in Kampuchea. In Angola, through their surrogates, the Cubans, they have 30,000 to 40,000 troops there to prevent the full expression of free will by the Angolan people to choose their own government. In Ethiopia, as you know, there are several thousands of troops there by the Cubans, supported financially and otherwise by the Soviet Union. 
What happened in Afghanistan was, as I said earlier—this is the first time in more than a quarter of a century when the Soviets have used massive troops of their own to invade and to dominate a freedom loving, deeply religious, and independent nation. They now have more than 100,000 heavily armed troops devoted to the subjugation of Afghanistan. And this is a radical departure of the Soviet Union from their more recent policy as far as using military force is concerned. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I would hope that our clear commitment to avoiding any acceptance of the status quo while the Soviets are involved in the violation of international peace and international law would send a clear signal to the Soviet Union that the consequences of their action will be severely adverse to themselves. 
As you know, the leaders of some of your nations have made direct appeals to the Soviet Union to withdraw their troops and to establish a nonaligned or independent or neutral country or government in Afghanistan acceptable to the people of that country. We would support this effort. But the Soviets, contrary to the assurance given to me by Brezhnev and given to, I know, at least, President Giscard by Brezhnev, have not withdrawn their troops. In my judgment, they have no inclination to withdraw their troops at this time; they've shown no evidence of that. 
And only by the Soviets realizing, finally, that they cannot prevail in this unwarranted aggression will they be induced to restore the previous boundaries and to let Afghanistan have a peaceful nation with a government of their own choosing. I would prefer that the government and the nation be nonaligned. 
There is another very important, tangible, and symbolic action that we must take without delay, and that is to make it clear to the world that we will not send our nation and our nation's flags to Moscow for the Summer Olympics while the Soviets are invading Afghanistan. This is a morally indecent act on their part, and I cannot imagine the democratic or freedom-loving nations adding an imprimatur of approval to the Soviets' invasion by sending teams to the Moscow Olympics. Our Olympic team will not go to Moscow, and my hope and expectation is that the other nations represented here will take similar action. 
But still, we feel that within the bounds of complete independence of a decision by each government to make, that a consistent approach must be made to the Soviet Union to let them know that we do want to have arms control, we do want to have the advantages of detente, but we are not going to accept armed aggression in a vital area of the world—where the interests of Europe are much more seriously threatened even than our own, because of a heavier dependence on exported oil from that region—and that further aggression will be severely met by a more consistent and a more forceful action. 
Farmers are very similar to one another all over the world. I happen to be a farmer. We have taken action to eliminate 17 million tons of grain sales to the Soviet Union. This was a difficult decision for me to make, particularly in an election year. But I think the American farmers have decided, as demonstrated by votes in key agricultural States, that they are willing to make this sacrifice, a financial sacrifice, in order to let the signal go clearly to the Soviet Union. 
So, I believe that if we want to have peace, want to have future trade, want to have a perpetuation of the advantages of detente, if we want to have a consistent commitment to controlling weapons and to lessening tensions in the world, we have got to respond effectively and forcefully and, I believe, peacefully to Soviet aggression when it's so blatant and so immoral as is taking place at this very moment in Afghanistan. 
THE PRESIDENT. I have had indications from all of the European leaders represented by you distinguished news reporters that we share a common commitment not to add our voice of approval to Soviet aggression by going to the Moscow Olympics. 
The U.S. Olympic Committee has already made a public statement quite early this year—I think in February or March—that they would honor the decision made by me and an almost unanimous vote in the U.S. Congress in both Houses and also by overwhelming public opinion in this country that we should not attend the Moscow Olympics because of the invasion. I have no doubt that the U.S. Olympic Committee will make this decision. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't agree with that at all, but obviously each nation would have to make its own decision. We're not trying to force our will upon others, but we make our position clear. 
The Soviets have, obviously, a great interest in the propaganda benefits to be derived for itself by an expression of participation with them in the Olympics in Moscow. Their own official publications and handbooks say that the granting to Moscow of a right to have the summer Olympics is an endorsement, in effect, of the Soviet foreign policy and a recognition of the peaceful nature of the Soviet Government. 
I think for a country to go to Moscow to participate in the summer Olympic games, to raise its flag in the Olympic stadium when the host government is engaged at that moment in an unwarranted and inhumane invasion of a free and independent country is abhorrent to the moral principles on which democracy is founded. I feel very strongly about this subject, and I believe that the overwhelming number of American citizens do as well. The opinion of Europeans may or may not be different; I have no way to know that. 
But I know that it will be a very difficult problem for the Soviet Union to explain to the rest of the world and to explain to its own citizens why 20 or 30 or 40 or 50 or maybe 70 other nations refuse to participate. As a matter of fact, when the United Nations voted earlier this year to condemn the Soviet Union, I think 104 countries voted in this way. The Soviet citizens never knew about the outcome of the United Nations condemnation. The Soviet Government is misleading its own people. 
My own judgment is that many Soviet citizens do object to invasion of other countries, do object to a direct threat to peace that might bring great adverse consequences to themselves. And I believe that this would be a very clear signal to the world and to the Soviet people that the Soviets have made a serious mistake in Afghanistan. 
I don't claim that not going to the Summer Olympics will be the single factor that would result in a withdrawal of their troops, but I believe that going to the Soviet Union is, in effect, an endorsement of the invasion and an endorsement of the violation of morality, human decency, and international law. 
I know that the Olympic Committee in Great Britain has announced that they prefer to go, but that they would assess future developments before they make a final decision. My understanding is that one of those future developments that they would assess is the willingness of the Soviet troops to be withdrawn from Afghanistan. 
I have no expectation at all that prior to the deadline date for the acceptance or rejection of the Moscow Olympics invitation—I think the 24th of May—that Soviet troops will be withdrawn. The contrary is the evidence. They are increasing their military involvement in Afghanistan. And it may be that when your own Olympic Committee assesses this fact that they might reverse themselves and decide not to send a team. 
We have been concerned for the last 15 years by the extraordinary buildup in Soviet military, strength. Year by year they have had a substantial real addition in commitment in their budget to their military forces. In the last 3 years, beginning in 1977, we have joined with our allies, including your country, in building up the strength of our own nations to match that extraordinary additional threat from the Soviet Union. 


National 4-H Club Remarks to Delegates Attending the Club's 50th Anniversary Conference. 
April 17, 1980

We're also concerned recently, from Christmas Day, with the unwarranted invasion by the Soviet Union of the small, relatively defenseless, freedom-loving, deeply religious country of Afghanistan. We've tried to marshal support for political and economic action, not only in our own country but also from around the world, to prove to the Soviet Union that they cannot invade a country like this without suffering very serious adverse consequences. We've taken some powerful action, along with other nations, but we've done it in a peaceful fashion


The President's News Conference
April 17, 1980
I can't predict to you exactly what other nations will do. In recent days, I have communicated with almost all of the major nations' leaders, asking them to take peaceful action, economic and political, to join with us in convincing Iran that they are becoming increasingly isolated from the rest of the civilized world and increasingly vulnerable to dissension and fragmentation within and to danger from without, particularly the Soviet Union-the north of Iran

This year, almost in a unique way, we've had additional responsibilities. I think it's been 25 or 30 years, for instance, since an incumbent Democratic President had to run a political campaign while he was in office. I don't deplore that. Theright of my opponents to run is theirs. But that's an additional complicating factor. It was obviously an additional burden for our entire Nation, not just for me, to have American hostages captured in Iran and to have the Soviet Union invade Afghanistan, which was a departure from 25 years of policy on their part not to use their own military forces to cross the borders into a previously undominated country

THE PRESIDENT. The fact is that, I guess, historically there has been a fairly substantial level of trade between the Soviet Union and Iran. Before the recent revolution, there were plans afoot for substantial increased shipments of natural gas from Iran into the Soviet Union in exchange for the barter of goods and perhaps hard cash. 
The rail lines and the road system which interconnects Iran and the Soviet Union are quite limited in their capacity. They may be used now at capacity; I don't really know the specifics about that. But I think that the quantity of goods that would be interrupted by a possible blockade, which I'm not predicting now specifically will take place, could not possibly be filled or replaced by the limited transportation routes by land, either from Turkey or Iraq or the Soviet Union, certainly not from Afghanistan, at this time.
But I think within the bounds of the limitations and difference of perspective, although I have sometimes been disappointed, I think they have performed adequately. And I believe recently, the last few days, and I believe next week, we will see a strong rush of support to join us in the boycott of the Moscow Olympics, which will be a heavy propaganda and psychological blow to the Soviet Union in condemnation of their invasion. And I believe their support for us in Iran will prove that the premise of your question, that we don't have their support and cooperation, is inaccurate



Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters From Pennsylvania. 
April 18, 1980

I don't think it would be appropriate for me to describe to you all the options that we would have militarily if a Soviet invasion took place. It would be even more serious than was the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and you know what our actions have been there, and you know the condemnation of the world has been aroused against the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union, in my opinion, would suffer very severe consequences of a broad kind if they should invade another country


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters From the Westinghouse Broadcasting Company, Inc.
April 18, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. We've got an extraordinary collection now, unfortunately, of both domestic and foreign policy matters that are extremely important to our country. In many ways they are interrelated. The Iranian hostages crisis, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan threatens the Mideast and the Persian Gulf region, from which comes a lot of our energy, our oil, and the oil prices, that more than doubled last year, have a direct impact on the inflation rate here and, therefore, interests rates

There's one more point I'd like to make on this inflation issue. We have advocated a balanced budget. Senator Kennedy is well known as the largest spender perhaps in the history of the United States Senate, and the only reductions in expenditure that I know he has advocated is cuts in the defense budget. This is exactly the wrong time to cut our Nation's ability to defend itself, with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and with the Iranian question as well. We need to strengthen our Nation's defense within the bounds of a balanced budget and giving very careful attention to those who need it.

THE PRESIDENT. There are things that are happening that affect people's lives that are not pleasant: our hostages are being held, the Soviets in Afghanistan, the inflation rate is high, the interest rates are high. Those things obviously do not help an incumbent, no matter how hard he might try to solve these problems. They are difficult problems. There are not easy, cheap, quick answers, and it's misleading to insinuate that there are. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I never have lost any sleep at all, even over matters much more important than public opinion polls. I've just done the best I could, made decisions whether they were popular or not, and so far, have done well in politics. Nobody predicted that my declaring a grain embargo against the Soviet Union and reducing American exports 17 million tons just a few days before the Iowa caucuses would help me in the farming areas. It was not an easy thing for me to do


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters From Pennsylvania. 
April 19, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I know. Well, I have refrained from the latter. I have not foreclosed the option on the former for two reasons. One is that there's an extraordinary circumstance of very serious crises that afflict our Nation now—the Iranian crisis, which we've just covered, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the necessity for me to act as a world leader and coordinating, as best I can, America's relation with all other nations throughout the world who want to help us, in varying degrees of importance, the very high inflation rates and interest rates which are impacting adversely on our economy, the dealing with Congress on matters of supreme importance, like energy. These kinds of things, collectively, do require my presence here in the White House more than they have any time before in my Presidency, or maybe even in a few preceding Presidencies, at least.

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. As you know, we've cut back 17 million tons of grain that the Soviets very badly needed, and we believe that they will only be able to replace maybe 5 or 6 million tons of that, which will leave them 10 or 12 million tons short. This will mean that the Soviets will be severely restrained on their production of all meat products. This grain was primarily to be used as feed for livestock. 
We have refused to let the Soviets fish in American waters, and they have a very heavy fishery commitment in the past. We have stopped the sale of all major products to the Soviet Union, like the construction of major plants, and any high technology equipment is forbidden to be sold to the Soviet Union much more strictly than it was in the past. 
In addition, we require an individual item approval now on equipment going, for instance, to the Soviet energy producing industry. And I think the greatest psychological blow to the Soviet Union will be an effective Olympics boycott. It is going to be—the Soviet people don't even know, through their Government, that 104 nations condemned the Soviets' invasion of Afghanistan and called for their withdrawal from Afghanistan. The Soviet people do not know that the world is expressing extreme displeasure against the Soviets' invasion and occupation of Afghanistan. It's going to be very difficult for the Soviets to explain the Olympic boycott, particularly if we are joined by other nations like Germany, France, Japan, China, and Canada. 
They may explain away an American absence from the boycott—I mean from the Olympics—as an expression of displeasure or a military action to eliminate detente and return to the cold war, but they cannot explain if 10, 20, 30, 50 nations join in the boycott. And so, I think that this combination of steps that we have taken has impressed the Soviet Union with the seriousness of their action. 
The other point is that the Soviets have also grossly underestimated the commitment and fighting capability of the Afghan freedom-fighters. The Soviets had anticipated a quick mop-up of any military opposition to their invasion, the establishment of a puppet government, and then, perhaps, a major withdrawal of Soviet troops in just a few weeks. That has not happened. As a matter of fact, the Soviets are at this moment still building up their military troops in Afghanistan and have conducted their operation with a gross violation of human rights, including some very horrible atrocities. 
So, the total combination of this effort is to convince the Soviets that they cannot invade another country with impunity, that the adverse consequences of this invasion are very serious
THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't think so. What we've done since I've been in office, working very closely with the farmers, is to increase enormously both exports of American agricultural products and also the storage of large quantities of American grain on the farm. We have a very good reserve supply of grain on the American farms at this time, and our exports this year, even including the effect of the Soviet embargo, will be extremely high compared to any previous year. We'll set an alltime world's record for exports

I would just like to say finally, in answer to this question, that the people have been extraordinarily sound and patient and wise in dealing with the Soviet Union, in dealing with the Iranian problem, in dealing with inflation, in dealing with high interest rates. It's unbelievable almost, looking back on political history, that an incumbent President could have done as well as I have, particularly not out campaigning. But I think the American people see that we're in it together. It takes a team effort to correct it, and there's no doubt in my mind that a majority of the American people will support a Democratic nominee in November


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters of Harte-Hanks Communications. 
April 23, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, we've not really gone it alone up until this point. We've had two unanimous votes in the U.N. Security Council to condemn the Iranian action and to encourage them to release the hostages. We had a vote in the Security Council to impose very rigid sanctions against Iran, and the vote was unanimous except that the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia cast negative votes, which has the effect of a veto


The President's News Conference
April 29, 1980
We have, for instance, met, I think as forcefully as is practicable and advisable, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, mounting economic sanctions against the Soviet Union, marshaling support of other nations for the boycott of the Olympics, letting the Soviets know, with 104 members of the U.N. condemning their action in the invasion of Afghanistan



White House Briefing for Civic and Community Leaders Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session. 
April 30, 1980

When we face each day here in Washington in the Government of the greatest nation on Earth, responsible for a multitude of issues, there is no way to separate one from another. Energy, inflation, interest rates, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the holding of our hostages in Iran, possible peace in the Middle East, dealing with the problems in Africa, moving forward with legislation on a broad basis, for budget matters both in defense as contrasted with and cooperative with domestic programs—they all fit in together in a common package

The Mideast, the Persian Gulf region provides about 90 percent of all the oil that's sold for export in the world. It's a 12,000-mile pipeline from there to here and from there to other countries on Earth. And when there is a disturbance in the Middle East, when there is a Palestinian problem in the Middle East not resolved, when there's enmity between Egypt and Israel or between Israel and her neighbors, or when there's an unstable Iran or an invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union, this aggravates our Nation's energy problems, because our security, both military and economic security, is predicated on an adequate supply of energy. There is no way to separate one from another

We have completed our economic sanctions or actions against the Soviet Union as a result of their invasion of Afghanistan, and we are inducing dozens and dozens of other nations to join with us in a boycott of the Moscow Olympics this summer, an issue that was severely in doubt a few months ago. We're trying to convince the Soviets that they made a mistake by going into Afghanistan, that they will suffer the consequences of it, and they ought not to depend upon armed aggression to carry out their purposes in that part of the world.

There is no question in my mind that the degree of maintenance and the capability of our equipment was very good. There is no other nation on Earth, including the Soviet Union, who could possibly have even attempted such a mission—the placement of our forces in the Indian Ocean with two major carrier task forces, the careful planning and training that was required, the travel of 600 land miles, nonstop flight in the dark, through storms, over mountains, into an isolated area of the jungle [desert], 1 where night vision devices were required to land, the sure knowledge from aerial surveillance that this was a proper place to land, when none of these people had had a chance to practice there

THE PRESIDENT. No, there's no loss of will. And I think that we ought to stop every now and then and not only inventory what we have but also think about what we have accomplished. 
Ours is a nation of great strength-economically, politically, militarily, and as I say every time, I 
It hasn't been too long ago that the largest, most powerful, most heavily populated Arab country was a close associate and friend and a dependent of the Soviet Union; that's Egypt. Egypt is now a very close, firm, solid friend of ours. 
The Soviets lost, we gained, the largest, most influential, most powerful, richest black nation on Earth—Nigeria. When I became President, it was strongly oriented away from us, toward the Soviet Union. When Secretary Kissinger tried to pay a visit to Nigeria, he was refused admittance to the country. And now Nigeria is one of not only our best trading partners but one of our closest friends and allies. 
It wasn't too long ago that the Soviets and the Chinese—the People's Republic of China—were close associates, Communist friends, and allies. And just the last couple of years, as you know, we've formed a new friendship with a quarter of the total population on Earth, when we had not had diplomatic relationships with the people of China for many years. We've not severed our good trade relationships, friendship with the people on Taiwan, either. 


