MID 222101, US v USSR, 22 aug to 21-Sep-70 to 10-Nov-70



296 - Remarks at a Citizenship Day Reception in Chicago, Illinois.
September 17, 1970

I was just running over the list of people who have been in the history of this country--recent history--very big men in the Nation, and who came from other lands. One of the great industrialists and one of the greatest inventive geniuses of our times--creative men--is David Sarnoff. He was born in Russia. He came to the United States from Russia



315 - Toasts of the President and President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia at a State Dinner in Belgrade.
September 30, 1970

In our relations with the Soviet Union, we are prepared to discuss the requirements of a stable strategic relationship and a limit on the deadly competition in nuclear arms


354 - Remarks in Ocean Grove, New Jersey.
October 17, 1970

Let's go further. Vietnam is not the only danger spot. We have avoided a war in the Mideast, and we trust that we can continue to avoid it. We have a cease-fire. We hope that we can continue it. We're negotiating with the Soviet Union far the limitation of arms


356 - Remarks on Arrival at Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
October 17, 1970

That is what we are working for. And I want to tell you, as I stand here referring not just to Vietnam but to the other trouble spots in the world, to the Mideast, our negotiations with the Soviet Union in other areas, while they are very difficult, while the dangers are very great, I believe we have the policies; I believe we have the strength; I believe we have the wisdom to accomplish this great objective that I referred to, not just peace for the next election, but peace for the next generation


368 - Remarks in Kansas City, Missouri.
October 19, 1970

That is what we are doing in Vietnam. That is why we have also worked out a cease-fire in the Mideast. That is why we have kept the strength and are keeping the strength of America up, but are indicating our willingness to negotiate with the Soviet Union to limit nuclear arms



375 - Remarks in Fort Wayne, Indiana.
October 20, 1970

We also are beginning to conduct negotiations with the Soviet Union on the limitation of nuclear arms. What a great thing that will be if we can get some kind of an agreement. It will be difficult, because their interests are different from ours. 
And that is why I have asked both the House and the Senate to provide the necessary strength for the United States, including the ABM system, which would be essential in the event that the Soviet Union were to negotiate, because if prior to negotiation we were to give up or reduce our own preparedness, it would mean they would have no reason to reduce their own arms strength


376 - Remarks to Overflow Crowd in Fort Wayne Coliseum.
October 20, 1970

I visited Yugoslavia which is a Communist country, somewhat independent in its foreign policy with regard to the Soviet Union but, nevertheless, a Communist country

What they were really trying to say in my view is very simply this: To millions of people in the world, in Europe, in Africa, in Latin America, in Asia, in Communist countries, as well as non-Communist countries--because I had the same thing happen in Communist Romania, I had the same thing happen 10 years ago in Poland, I have had the same thing happen in Novosibirsk in the middle of the Soviet Union in 1959--for hundreds of millions of people, the United States, our country, is still as it was in the beginning--it is the symbol of hope, of freedom. It is the symbol of opportunity

This is a good country. I have been to 70 countries. I have been now to almost 70 countries. And I have enjoyed every visit and I have liked the people of every one of those countries. I liked the Russian people, and I liked the Romanian people, and I liked the Hungarian people, and I liked the Polish people, and the French and the Indians and the Indanesians and all the rest





377 - Address to the 25th Anniversary Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
October 23, 1970

This central issue turns in large part on the relations among the great nuclear powers. Their strength imposes on them special responsibilities of restraint and wisdom. The issue of war and peace cannot be solved unless we in the United States and the Soviet Union both the will and the capacity to put relationship on a basis consistent with aspirations of mankind. 
Commenting here today relationships, I see no point in responding in kind to traditional cold war rhetoric. The facts of the recent past speak for themselves. An effort to score debating points is not the way to advance the cause of peace. 
One of the reasons the world had such high hopes for the United Nations at the time of its founding was that the United States and the Soviet Union had fought together as allies in World War II. We cooperated in bringing the U.N. into being. There were hopes that this cooperation would continue. 
We all must recognize that the United States and the Soviet Union have very profound and fundamental differences. 
It would not be realistic, therefore, to suggest that our differences can be eliminated merely by better personal relationships between the heads of our governments. Such a view would slight the seriousness of our disagreements. 
Genuine progress in our relations calls for specifics, not merely atmospherics. A true detente is built by a series of actions, not by a superficial shift in the apparent mood. 
It would not be realistic to suggest that all we need to improve our relations is "better mutual understanding." 
Understanding is necessary. But we do understand one another well enough to know that our differences are real, and that in many respects we will continue to be competitors. Our task is to keep that competition peaceful, to make it creative. 
Neither would it be realistic to deny that power has a role in our relations. Power is a fact of international life. Our mutual obligation is to discipline that power, to seek together with other nations to ensure that it is used to maintain peace, not to threaten the peace. 
I state these obstacles to peace because they are the challenge that must be overcome. 
Despite the deep differences between ourselves and the Soviet Union, there are four great factors that provide a basis for a common interest in working together to contain and to reduce those differences. 
The first of these factors is at once the most important and the most obvious. Neither of us wants a nuclear exchange that would cost the lives of tens of millions of people. Thus, we have a powerful common interest in avoiding a nuclear confrontation. 
The second of these factors is the enormous cost of arms. Certainly we both should welcome the opportunity to reduce the burden, to use our resources for building rather than destroying. 
The third factor is that we both are major industrial powers, which at present have very little trade or commercial contact with one another. It would clearly be in the economic self-interest of each of us if world conditions would permit us to increase trade and contact between us. 
The fourth factor is the global challenge of economic and social development. The pressing economic and social needs around the world can give our competition a creative direction. 
Thus, in these four matters, we have substantial mutual incentives to find ways of working together despite our continuing difference of views on other matters. 
It was in this spirit that I announced, on taking office, that the policy of the United States would be to move from an era of confrontation to one of negotiation. 
This is a spirit that we hope will dominate the talks between our two countries on the limitation of strategic arms. 
There is no greater contribution which the United States and the Soviet Union together could make than to limit the world's capacity for self-destruction. 
This would reduce the danger of war. And it would enable us to devote more of our resources--abroad as well as at home--to assisting in the constructive works of economic development and in peaceful progress: in Africa, for example, where so many nations have gained independence and dignity during the life of the United Nations; in Asia, with its rich diversity of cultures and peoples; and in Latin America, where the United States has special bonds of friendship and cooperation. 
Despite our many differences, the United States and the Soviet Union have managed ever since World War II to avoid direct conflicts. But history shows"as the tragic experience of World War I indicates--that great powers can be drawn into conflict without their intending it by wars between smaller nations. 
The Middle East is a place today where local rivalries are intense, where the vitalinterests of the United States and the Soviet Union are both involved. obviously, the primary responsibility achieving a peaceful settlement in Middle East rests on the nations the themselves. But in this region in tar, it is imperative that the two major powers conduct themselves so as to strengthen the forces of peace rather than to strengthen the forces of war. 
It is essential that we and the Soviet Union join in efforts toward avoiding war in the Middle East, and also toward developing a climate in which the nations of the Middle East will learn to live and let live. It is essential not only in the interest of the people of the Middle East themselves, but also because the alternative could be a confrontation with disastrous consequences for the Middle East, for our nations, and for the whole world. 
Therefore, we urge the continuation of the cease-fire and the creation of confidence in which peace efforts can go forward. 
In the world today we are at a crossroads. We can follow the old way, playing the traditional game of international. relations, but at ever-increasing risk. Everyone will lose. No one will gain. we can take a new road. 
I invite the leaders of the Soviet Union to join us in taking that new join in a peaceful competition, not in accumulation of arms but in the dissemination of progress; not in the building of missiles but in waging a winning war against hunger and disease and human misery in our own countries and are around the globe.


379 - Remarks in Dundalk, Maryland.
October 24, 1970

And so it is also, my friends, I spoke yesterday, as you may remember, to the United Nations in New York. I spoke there of the world problems. It happens that the President of the United States, from time to time, must negotiate with world powers. He must particularly negotiate with the Soviet Union. The success of those negotiations will determine whether we avoid a world war and even may determine whether we avoid small wars in the years ahead


388 - Toasts of the President and President Ceausescu of Romania.
October 26, 1970

It happens that in the world today because of the divisions, there are times when the leader of one nation does not have adequate communication with the leader of another. But as I was saying to the President earlier today, he is in a rather unique position. He heads a government which is one of the few in the world which has good relations with the United States, good relations with the Soviet Union, and good relations with the People's Republic of China


392 - Remarks in West Palm Beach, Florida.
October 27, 1970

That is what we are working for and that is the support that we want in the United States Senate. If we are going to have that generation of peace, we not only have to end this war, it is necessary for the President and his associates to negotiate, to negotiate particularly with the major powers and particularly the Soviet Union


394 - Remarks in St. Petersburg, Florida.
October 28, 1970

In order to win it we also are going to have to be strong. It is necessary for the President of the United States to negotiate with other nations, and particularly with other major nuclear powers, including the Soviet Union


397 - Remarks at Longview, Texas.
October 28, 1970

And then further, beyond this war, it is essential that the United States, and particularly its President, be able to negotiate with any major power--and I speak particularly of the Soviet Union--to negotiate for the reduction of the great burden of arms in the world, thereby reducing the danger of nuclear war in the world


406 - Remarks in Rochester, Minnesota.
October 29, 1970

And remember, too, that a strong America, one in which the President of the United States when he goes to the bargaining table with the Soviet Union or any other power negotiates from strength rather than weakness, is essential if we are going to have this generation of peace. And he stands for that strong America


411 - Remarks in San Jose, California.
October 29, 1970

It is very easy to talk about reducing our spending for defense, reduce it beyond what the President has recommended. It is very easy to vote against, as did half the Senate, an adequate missile defense for the United States of America, when our potential opponents in the world already have one. But, my friends, we are entering a period of negotiation with the Soviet Union. I hope that negotiation--I believe that it can reduce the burden of nuclear arms and increase the chances of real peace in the years ahead


413 - Remarks in Anaheim, California.
October 30, 1970

And if you want that, then it is important that we get backing, backing for the President from the Senate, backing that men like George Murphy and the others that I have campaigned for across this country have been giving. If you want that, it is also important that the President of the United States, whenever he negotiates with other countries--and particularly when he negotiates with the Soviet Union, as I will be negotiating in the future, and as my representatives will be, for the limitation of nuclear arms-when we negotiate, let us be sure that the President of the United States negotiates from strength and not from weakness


419 - Remarks in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
October 31, 1970

Let me tell you why: The President of the United States has a responsibility, along with his associates, for negotiating with the Soviet Union and other major powers, and particularly with the Soviet Union on limiting nuclear arms so that we can reduce the danger of any war, and particularly a nuclear war. 
We are going to proceed in that era of negotiation. But in order to do so, we have to have some cards on our side of the table. And what we find here, then, is another clear difference of opinion. On the one hand, the present Senator, against whom Andy Carter is running, voted-and I know he believed this way, he was sincere in voting that way--voted to take one card away, voted against having a missile defense for the United States when the Soviet Union had it. 
I say don't send the President of the United States to the bargaining table with the Soviet Union in a position of weakness. Put him there in a position of strength. That is what we need to have.


421 - Remarks in Las Vegas, Nevada.
October 31, 1970

The President of the United States and his colleagues are going to have to negotiate in the months and perhaps the years ahead with the Soviet Union in the critical area of nuclear arms. I have indicated that we should move from a period of confrontation to negotiation. 
A year ago, I made a very hard decision, a decision that because the Soviet Union had an ABM missile defense, the United States should try to have one.

423 - Remarks in Salt Lake City, Utah.
October 31, 1970

And then we go to the larger area. If we are going to have peace in the world, it isn't just ending the war in Vietnam. It is a question of working out the relations between the United States and the Soviet Union. Here I have implemented an era of negotiation as distinguished from confrontation. 
There will be, as there have been over the past 2 years, more negotiations with the Soviet Union, particularly in the field of limiting nuclear arms. 
And now the very simple question is: How do we negotiate? 
I can only say this: Don't send your President to the negotiating table with the Soviet leaders, or don't send his advisers to the negotiating table with the Soviet leaders, in a position of weakness. Let's be sure we negotiate from strength and not from weakness with the Soviet leaders. 
And here again, we have a very precise difference between the two candidates. One has consistently supported those appropriations, those measures, which would maintain the strength of the United States, that would build, for example, a system, an antiballistic missile system, which the Soviets have already, and which would give us a bargaining position as we attempt to negotiate the reduction in nuclear arms. The other opposes it. 
My point is this: I know the Soviet leaders. I know them not personally, but I know, certainly, what their attitudes are in such negotiations. And it is vitally important, if we want negotiations to succeed, if we want to reduce this burden of nuclear arms on ourselves and the danger of nuclear war for the years ahead



