MID 274201, US v Cuba, 2 mar to 1-Apr-87 to 1-May-87




Radio Address to the Nation on Regional Conflicts 
March 7, 1987

In the last few months we've seen movement in some of these areas. In one area, however, we're particularly disappointed. I mean the area of regional conflicts. The Soviets continue to occupy Afghanistan. They continue to supply billions of dollars of weapons to regimes like Libya, Syria, Cuba, Nicaragua, Vietnam, Ethiopia, South Yemen, and Angola, and to supply weapons to groups like the PLO. As long as the Soviets keep this up, East-West tensions will continue. And that's why it is in the interest of world peace to convince the Soviets to stop it. The free world today has an opportunity to do just that. And around the world, in many of the countries I've just mentioned, there are people fighting for freedom against Soviet-sponsored oppressors. We can help them. 
And now, take Nicaragua—much closer to home. The whole world wants to see a peaceful solution there, too. But the heart of the problem in Nicaragua is that, with vast Soviet and Cuban help, the regime there stifles democracy, has crushed the free press, persecutes religious believers, and is consolidating totalitarian control. In the face of this, a democratic resistance is growing. It has inspired the largest, fastest growing, volunteer peasant force in Latin America in almost a century. Its fighters and leaders are largely from poor families. They fight because they've seen Communist oppression firsthand. They are struggling for democracy. To abandon them would betray our own principles. A democratic solution will require real negotiations between the Sandinista regime and its opposition, including the armed resistance. Any diplomacy that excludes the resistance can't solve the problem.


The President's News Conference
March 19, 1987
The President. Andrea [Andrea Mitchell, NBC News], I don't believe—I was aware that there are private groups and private individuals in this country—I don't believe it was counter to our law that these people were voluntarily offering help, just as we've seen in the past. We had a thing called the Abraham Lincoln Brigade in Spain in the civil war there. And I don't know how much that would amount to. I don't know whether it's enough to keep them in business or not. But I do know that it is absolutely vital that we not back away from this. We've had some experiences in our country where the Congress has turned on a President. Angola was the most recent example, perhaps—when in Angola, when it ceased being a colony and the civil war broke out there and there was a Communist faction and there was a group that wanted democracy. And an American President asked Congress just for money—no blood, just money to help the democratic people of Angola have a democratic government. They don't have a democratic government; they have a Communist government now, and there are 37,000 Cuban soldiers fighting their battle




Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Los Angeles World Affairs Council Luncheon in California 
April 10, 1987

In Angola, too, we see an escalating Soviet and Cuban military commitment in the vain quest for a military victory. We callfor a political solution and for the speedy removal of Fidel Castro's 35,000 Cuban mercenaries from Angola. Cambodia is another tragic example of aggression and occupation, imposed by Vietnam and backed by the U.S.S.R. The Cambodian people have suffered enough; itistime for genuine self-determination and peace in Cambodia


Remarks at the Annual Republican Congressional Fund-raising Dinner 
April 29, 1987

I received a letter signed by several of the field commanders of the democratic resistance a few months ago, just before they began their long trek back into Nicaragua. They went knowing they faced an enemy supported by Eastern-bloc and Cuban military advisers, an enemy armed with powerful Soviet weapons. In their letter these field commanders indicated they understood the political difficulties I was going through and appreciated the faith that I had in them. And they pledged, as individuals who were putting their lives on the line, fighting against tremendous odds, that they would not let me down. What they meant is, they would not let us down



