MID 219201, US v North Korea, 14 may to 13-Jun-77 to 17-Mar-78




The President's News Conference
May 26, 1977
The essence of the question is, is our country committed on a permanent basis to keep troops in South Korea even if they are not needed to maintain the stability of that peninsula? I think it is accurate to say that the time has come for a very careful, very orderly withdrawal over a period of 4 or 5 years of ground troops, leaving intact an adequate degree of strength in the Republic of Korea to withstand any foreseeable attack and making it clear to the North Koreans, the Chinese, the Soviets, that ourcommitment to South Korea is undeviating and 'is staunch. 
We will leave there adequate intelligence forces, observation forces, air forces, naval forces, and a firm, open commitment to our defense treaty, so there need not be any doubt about potential adversaries concerning our support of South Korea. 
We have also a complete confidence in the deep purpose of the South Koreans to defend their own country. Compared to the North Koreans, they have a two-to-one advantage in total population, and they have much greater access to the Western industrialized democracies for advanced equipment and for technology. 
After that announcement was made is when General Singlaub made a comment publicly that if this policy was carried out, it would result in war. In my opinion, that was a very serious breach of the propriety that ought to exist among military officers after a policy has been made, and I think to some degree it was an invitation to the North Koreans to believe that South Korea was not able to take care of themselves, which we think they are. I think it was an invitation to the world to expect an inevitable war. And I certainly don't agree that there is any cause for a war to be expected. 
In addition to that, I think it is important to remember that we are now in the process of carrying out this policy. And I don't believe that General Singlaub, being our negotiator with the North Koreans, by the way, and also being the third person in command in South Korea, could have effectively carried out this policy when he had publicly been identified as being opposed to it




Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With a Group of Editors and News Directors. 
January 13, 1978

We've had a defense pact with the South Koreans ever since 1954. We intend to honor all the elements of that defense treaty. We arecommitted to the security of South Korea. We'd like to have the differences between them and North Korea resolved in a friendly and mutually constructive fashion. 
We support direct negotiations between the North and South Koreans. We will participate with them and other interested parties if necessary. We've been invited by the North Koreans, indirectly at least, to meet with them without the South Koreans being present. We are not willing to do that



