MID 222601, US v USSR, 13 jan to 12-Feb-80 to 19-Mar-80



White House Conference on Small Business Remarks at the Opening Session of the Conference
January 13, 1980

As citizens of a free society, as supporters of human freedom and human dignity, we have been justifiably outraged about recent international events. We are outraged that, half a world away, the Iranian Government holds 50 innocent Americans hostage in violation of international law and in violation of human decency. And we are also outraged that in that same troubled spot of the world, armed forces of the Soviet Union, a superpower, have launched a massive invasion of the small, nonaligned country of Afghanistan

Normal trade and commerce has been interrupted in order to demonstrate vividly our abhorrence and our own condemnation of terrorism and military aggression against innocent people. Under even the best of circumstances, normal trade will not soon be resumed with the Soviet Union


National Medal of Science Remarks at the Presentation Ceremony. 
January 14, 1980

But we've seen recent examples of what repression does to material progress, as well as what it does to the human spirit. China today is grappling with the damage done to a whole generation, perhaps two generations, by the restraints on or the closing of its universities and its laboratories. The Soviet Union, despite its enormous investment in science and technology, still trails the West in many fields which it recognizes to be crucial. Even with its avid efforts to identify scientific talent early and to develop it and to exploit it, its repressive political system still stunts scientific progress


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors
January 15, 1980

I'd like to open by saying that I believe that we are now facing one of the most serious threats to peace since the Second World War, with the invasion by the Soviet Union and the brutal attempt to repress the independent people of Afghanistan in this last, very most serious crisis that our Nation faces and has observed. The world has condemned the Soviet Union in an almost unprecedented way, with 104 nations in the United Nations voting to condemn the presence of the Soviet troops and demanding that they be withdrawn from Afghanistan. Only 18 nations supported the Soviets' position, and those were nations that were either completely dominated by the Soviet Union or heavily dependent upon the Soviet Union for their existence in an economic and viable way. 
This expression of condemnation and abhorrence was indeed very widespread, not only the nations adjacent to the Soviet Union, which are under threat, but also among the Islamic countries located throughout the world and, of course, among nations which are industrialized and/or developing themselves at this time. 
This threat to peace is one that deeply concerns our own country, and we have taken action which has been forceful and, I believe, punitive to the Soviet Union, to convince them that the consequences of their invasion will not be light. We've forbidden their fishing rights in our waters. We have interrupted the delivery of large quantities of grain. We've interrupted high technology sales to the Soviet Union. And we are now consulting with our allies, in Europe and other places throughout the world, to see what other steps might be advisable.
Another thing is that our Nation has faced in recent months, the last 2 months, a little more, a threat to world peace. And I think at a time like this the President's voice is heard very clearly. I've had a chance to speak and let the American people understand the considerations that I've had to face, and understand the decisions that I've made. I think basically we've taken the right steps to meet the threat to our hostages in Iran, more recently the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan

We are consulting very closely with our allies. When our hostages were seized, when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, the first step I took was to consult with other like-minded nations to deal with these threats to peace and with international terrorism. 
But it would be ill-advised, I think, for me to specify particular things that we are talking to them about now. We are trying to carry out the United Nations desire, as expressed by overwhelming votes, in dealing with both these matters; and to strengthen countries that might be threatened; and to alleviate tensions that exist because of the Soviet invasion and the capture of our hostages. But as far as specific commitments, it would be better not to speak about them until we can permit the other allies to speak for themselves. 
THE PRESIDENT. My opinion is that they have been surprised not only by the trade restraints that I have imposed but also by 'the overwhelming condemnation voted by the U.N. I think the Soviets felt that they could take this action with just a minimal adverse reaction. I consider it to be more serious than their suppression of the uprising, for instance, in Czechoslovakia 10 or 11 years ago, in 1969, because this was an independent country, a nonaligned country, a deeply religious country that the Soviets went into with invading forces and subjugated. This is quite a radical departure from what they had done in the years since the Second World War. 
And it has much greater strategic implications for us, with its threat to Pakistan, with its threat to Iran, with its threat to 90 percent of the exportable oil supplies in the world. And my belief is, based on evidence, that the Soviets have been somewhat chastened and surprised by the strong reaction in the other nations in the world, as exemplified by the U.N. vote, and also that other countries have rallied along with us to lead action that would restrain the Soviets repeating this in the future. 
I don't know what the future holds, but I'm resolved not to back off on ourcommitment to hold the Soviets responsible for what they've done.
THE PRESIDENT. To simplify an answer I'd say two things: one, the evident interest of the Iowa farmers in my administration's commitment not to let them suffer because of the interruption of grain sales to the Soviet Union—and Bergland's belief is that he adequately reassured them, as evidenced by the stability of the present grain market; secondly, the high degree of patriotism and support that was evident among the Iowa people for the action that we took against the Soviet Union

THE PRESIDENT. Well, a blockade is really—I think it would be considered the same as a declaration of war against Cuba. As you know, we imposed a blockade temporarily, began to impose one, when the Russian missiles were there, early in the 1960's. And then we withdrew the blockade when the Russian missiles designed to .attack our own country were removed, retaining thereafter an embargo of trade with Cuba

My own sense about Cuba is not one of fear, but one of deep concern, and the arousing of public opinion against Cuba. Cuba had a very severe setback, in my opinion, when they failed to get even the full support of the nonaligned countries in their effort to be a member of the Security Council. And we have, I think, the right attitude toward Cuba and the Soviet Union. One is a deep concern about Cuba's effort to intrude in other countries; an awareness of their limited success in this hemisphere, because people know them by their stripes; and third, a decision which I have perpetuated from previous Presidents, that we not go to war with Cuba by trying to impose a blockade around them

My hope is that the countries that have welcomed into their borders Cuban troops and have signed the so-called peace and friendship agreements with the Soviet Union have seen in the Afghanistan situation the threat to their own independence. I don't think that it's accurate to say that Angola is an independent country as long as they've got thirty or forty thousand Cuban troops there. And I don't think that Ethiopia has any sure belief any longer that if they wanted Russian and Cuban troops to leave that they would indeed leave. 
My belief is and my hope is that many of the nonaligned countries that previously did give support to Castro and quite often voted, almost always, with the Soviet Union and against the Western democratic nations have now reversed themselves, because they see that the real threat to them is not democracy, it's not freedom, but it's the totalitarian influence of Cuba and the Soviet Union


"Meet the Press" Interview with Bill Monroe, Carl T. Rowan, David Broder, and Judy Woodruff
January 20, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. No. Neither I nor the American people would support the sending of an American team to Moscow with Soviet invasion troops in Afghanistan. I've sent a message today to the United States Olympic Committee spelling out my own position: that unless the Soviets withdraw their troops within a month from Afghanistan, that the Olympic games be moved from Moscow to an alternate site or multiple sites or postponed or canceled. If the Soviets do not withdraw their troops immediately from Afghanistan within a month, I would not support the sending of an American team to the Olympics. It's very important for the world to realize how serious a threat the Soviets' invasion of Afghanistan is. 
I do not want to inject politics into the Olympics, and I would personally favor the establishment of a permanent Olympic site for both the summer and the winter games. In my opinion, the most appropriate permanent site for the summer games would be Greece. This will be my own position, and I have asked the U.S. Olympic Committee to take this position to the International Olympic Committee, and I would hope that as many nations as possible would support this basic position. One hundred and four nations voted against the Soviet invasion and called for their immediate withdrawal from Afghanistan in the United Nations, and I would hope as many of those as possible would support the position I've just outlined to you. 
THE PRESIDENT. Regardless of what other nations might do, I would not favor the sending of an American Olympic team to Moscow while the Soviet invasion troops are in Afghanistan. 
THE PRESIDENT. AS I said earlier, Mr. Rowan, this in my opinion is the most serious threat to world peace since the Second World War. It's an unprecedented act on the part of the Soviet Union. It's the first time they have attacked, themselves, a nation that was not already under their domination, that is, a part of the Warsaw Pact neighborhood. They have used surrogate forces, the Cubans, to participate in other countries like Angola or Ethiopia. 
This is a threat to a vital area of the world. It's a threat to an area of the world where the interests of our country and those interests of our allies are deeply imbedded. More than two-thirds of the total exportable oil that supplies the rest of the world comes from the Persian Gulf region in Southwest Asia. 
My own assessment is that there have been times in the years gone by that we have had intense competition with the Soviet Union and also an effort for accommodation with the Soviet Union and for consulting with them and working with them toward peace. This is an action initiated by the Soviets—and I am still committed to peace, but peace through strength and through letting the Soviets know in a clear and certain way, by action of our own country and other nations, that they cannot invade an innocent country with impunity; they must suffer the consequences. 
THE PRESIDENT. We've not been weak. We've been firm and resolved and consistent and clear in our policy since I've been in the White House. We've had a steady increase in ourcommitment to the strength of our national defense, as measured by budget levels and also measured by the tone and actions that I have taken and the Congress has taken. We've strengthened our alliances with NATO, both in the buildup of fighting capability and also, lately, in the theater nuclear force response to the Soviet threat with atomic weapons. We've also let it be clear that we favor the resolution of intense differences that have destabilized the Middle East and the Persian Gulf region. 
In addition to that, we're increasing and will maintain an increased level of naval forces in the northern Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf region. And we are now exploring with some intensity the establishment of facilities for the servicing of our air and naval forces in the northern Indian Ocean, Persian Gulf region. These actions have been initiated ever since I've been in office. They are consistent and clear, and we are concentrating on them now with an increased level of commitment because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
THE PRESIDENT. I've never doubted the long-range policy or the long-range ambitions of the Soviet Union. The fact that we have consistently strengthened our own Nation's defense, after 15 years of a decrease in commitment to our Nation's defense vis-a-vis the Soviets, is one indication of that. All of the actions that I described earlier—the strengthening of NATO, the movement into the northern Indian Ocean, the search for peace in the Mideast, and so forth—were directly because of the ultimate threat by the Soviet Union to world peace. 
But it is obvious that the Soviets' actual invasion of a previously nonaligned country, an independent, freedom-loving country, a deeply religious country, with their own massive troops is a radical departure from the policy or actions that the Soviets have pursued since the Second World War. It is a direct threat because Pakistan [Afghanistan],1 formerly a buffer state between the Soviet Union and Iran and the world's oil supplies and the Hormuz Straits and the Persian Gulf, has now become kind of an arrow aiming at those crucial strategic regions of the world. So, this is a major departure by the Soviet Union from their previous actions. 
Their long-range policies have been well understood by me then and still are.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the Soviets have seriously misjudged our own Nation's strength and resolve and unity and determination and the condemnation that has accrued to them by the world community because of their invasion of Afghanistan. As you know, Cuban troops went into Angola long before I became President. And the Soviet brigade, about 2,000 to 2,500 troops, have been in Cuba since the early 1960's. There has obviously been a buildup in the Soviet adventurism in the Horn of Africa, in Ethiopia. These moves were of great concern to us. 
But the point that I would like to make clear is that we have always had a very complicated relationship with the Soviet Union—based on cooperation when we could together move toward a peaceful resolution of the world's problems, like the negotiation of the SALT treaty, and competition with the Soviet Union when our interests were at cross purposes in any region of the world. I think our strength has been clearly demonstrated. The resolve of our Nation has been clearly demonstrated. The support of our allies has been clearly demonstrated, and indeed, the support of the world in the condemnation of the Soviets' recent invasion has also been clearly demonstrated.
There has been, obviously, a new element introduced into the Iranian hostage crisis in recent weeks with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. My belief is that many of the responsible officials in Iran now see that this major threat to Iran's security and the peace of Iran is becoming paramount, and that there will be an additional effort on their part to secure the release of the hostages and remove the isolation of Iran from the rest of the civilized world. 
But I think our actions have been well considered. We have taken every element of caution about the possibility which you describe. And in my judgment, the best thing for Iran to do now is to release the hostages, to seek redress of their alleged grievances in the international fora and the courts of the individual nations, and to begin to strengthen themselves against the possible threat by the Soviets now addressed toward them in Afghanistan. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, obviously, when a nation is in a state of crisis—a deep obsession and concern with the holding of innocent Americans and an acknowledged threat to world peace by a Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, with high inflation brought about by, in my opinion, unwarranted increases in the price of oil—this preys on the mind of Americans. We are taking action, as I've described on this program and previously, to alleviate these concerns, and I believe that the unity of America has been paramount. I believe the future will hold a better prospect for the alleviation of those tensions


The State of the Union Address Delivered Before a Joint Session of the Congress. 
January 23, 1980

Three basic developments have helped to shape our challenges: the steady growth and increased projection of Soviet military power beyond its own borders; the overwhelming dependence of the Western democracies on oil supplies from the Middle East; and the press of social and religious and economic and political change in the many nations of the developing world, exemplified by the revolution in Iran. 
Each of these factors is important in its own right. Each interacts with the others. All must be faced together, squarely and courageously. We will face these challenges, and we will meet them with the best that is in us. And we will not fail. 
We continue to pursue these specific goals: first, to protect the present and long-range interests of the United States; secondly, to preserve the lives of the American hostages and to secure, as quickly as possible, their safe release, if possible, to avoid bloodshed which might further endanger the lives of our fellow citizens; to enlist the help of other nations in condemning this act of violence, which is shocking and violates the moral and the legal standards of a civilized world; and also to convince and to persuade the Iranian leaders that the real danger to their nation lies in the north, in the Soviet Union and from the Soviet troops now in Afghanistan, and that the unwarranted Iranian quarrel with the United States hampers their response to this far greater danger to them. 
But now we face a broader and more fundamental challenge in this region because of the recent military action of the Soviet Union. 
Now, as during the last 3 1/2 decades, the relationship between our country, the United States of America, and the Soviet Union is the most critical factor in determining whether the world will live at peace or be engulfed in global conflict. 
Since the end of the Second World War, America has led other nations in meeting the challenge of mounting Soviet power. This has not been a simple or a static relationship. Between us there has been cooperation, there has been competition, and at times there has been confrontation. 
In the 1940's we took the lead in creating the Atlantic Alliance in response to the Soviet Union's suppression and then consolidation of its East European empire and the resulting threat of the Warsaw Pact to Western Europe. 
In the 1950's we helped to contain further Soviet challenges in Korea and in the Middle East, and we rearmed to assure the continuation of that containment. 
In the 1960's we met the Soviet challenges in Berlin, and we faced the Cuban missile crisis. And we sought to engage the Soviet Union in the important task of moving beyond the cold war and away from confrontation. 
And in the 1970's three American Presidents negotiated with the Soviet leaders in attempts to halt the growth of the nuclear arms race. We sought to establish rules of behavior that would reduce the risks of conflict, and we searched for areas of cooperation that could make our relations reciprocal and productive, not only for the sake of our two nations but for the security and peace of the entire world. 
In all these actions, we have maintained two commitments: to be ready to meet any challenge by Soviet military power, and to develop ways to resolve disputes and to keep the peace. 
Preventing nuclear war is the foremost responsibility of the two superpowers. That's why we've negotiated the strategic arms limitation treaties—SALT I and SALT II. Especially now, in a time of great tension, observing the mutual constraints imposed by the terms of these treaties will be in the best interest of both countries and will help to preserve world peace. I will consult very closely with the Congress on this matter as we strive to control nuclear weapons. That effort to control nuclear weapons will not be abandoned. 
We superpowers also have the responsibility to exercise restraint in the use of our great military force. The integrity and the independence of weaker nations must not be threatened. They must know that in our presence they are secure. 
But now the Soviet Union has taken a radical and an aggressive new step. It's using its great military power against a relatively defenseless nation. The implications of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan could pose the most serious threat to the peace since the Second World War. 
The vast majority of nations on Earth have condemned this latest Soviet attempt to extend its colonial domination of others and have demanded the immediate withdrawal of Soviet troops. The Moslem world is especially and justifiably outraged by this aggression against an Islamic people. No action of a world power has ever been so quickly and so overwhelmingly condemned. But verbal condemnation is not enough. The Soviet Union must pay a concrete price for their aggression. 
While this invasion continues, we and the other nations of the world cannot conduct business as usual with the Soviet Union. That's why the United States has imposed stiff economic penalties on the Soviet Union. I will not issue any permits for Soviet ships to fish in the coastal waters of the United States. I've cut Soviet access to high-technology equipment and to agricultural products. I've limited other commerce with the Soviet Union, and I've asked our allies and friends to join with us in restraining their own trade with the Soviets and not to replace our own embargoed items. And I have notified the Olympic Committee that with Soviet invading forces in Afghanistan, neither the American people nor I will support sending an Olympic team to Moscow. 
The Soviet Union is going to have to answer some basic questions: Will it help promote a more stable international environment in which its own legitimate, peaceful concerns can be pursued? Or will it continue to expand its military power far beyond its genuine security needs, and use that power for colonial conquest? The Soviet Union must realize that its decision to use military force in Afghanistan will be costly to every political and economic relationship it values. 
The region which is now threatened by Soviet troops in Afghanistan is of great strategic importance: It contains more than two-thirds of the world's exportable oil. The Soviet effort to dominate Afghanistan has brought Soviet military forces to within 300 miles of the Indian Ocean and close to the Straits of Hormuz, a waterway through which most of the world's oil must flow. The Soviet Union is now attempting to consolidate a strategic position, therefore, that poses a grave threat to the free movement of Middle East oil. 
This situation demands careful thought, steady nerves, and resolute action, not only for this year but for many years to come. It demands collective efforts to meet this new threat to security in the Persian Gulf and in Southwest Asia. It demands the participation of all those who rely on oil from the Middle East and who are concerned with global peace and stability. And it demands consultation and close cooperation with countries in the area which might be threatened. 
Meeting this challenge will take national will, diplomatic and political wisdom, economic sacrifice, and, of course, military capability. We must callon the best that is in us to preserve the security of this crucial region. 
Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault on the vitalinterests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled by any meansnecessary, including military force. 
We are also improving our capability to deploy U.S. military forces rapidly to distant areas. We've helped to strengthen NATO and our other alliances, and recently we and other NATO members have decided to develop and to deploy modernized, intermediate-range nuclear forces to meet an unwarranted and increased threat from the nuclear weapons of the Soviet Union

United States Conference of Mayors Remarks to Mayors Attending the Conference's Winter Meeting. 
January 25, 1980

The capturing of 50 American hostages, innocent people, by terrorists or kidnapers has aroused the finest elements of the American spirit. America has been brought to its knees by this incident, not in submission but in prayer. And I've been impressed with the difference between our country and the Soviet Union. Just to think that 220 million Americans, blessed in every possible way, have become almost completely obsessed with concern and hope about just 50 people. It shows that ourcommitment to human rights is not just a theory and that we haven't lost the basic elements that make us proud of this country in which we live. 
And not too far from Iran there's a little country named Afghanistan—proud, independent. They haven't been subjugated completely in 2,000 years; deeply religious. And they are being ground under an enormous military power with loss of life, executions, powerful Soviet troops fighting against the soldiers of Afghanistan, trying to stamp out freedom. It shows a vivid difference between our two countries



Leadership Conference on Civil Rights Remarks at the Annual Hubert H. Humphrey Award Dinner
January 27, 1980

The tremendous votes that took place recently in the United Nations contradicts the historical tone, when the small nations and the new nations and the weak nations and those who represented populations with black and brown and yellow people supported our position with our hostages in Iran and who condemned the Soviet Union for their invasion of Afghanistan. That would likely not have been the case a few years ago


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
January 29, 1980

But we did have adequate intelligence prior to the Soviets' action in Afghanistan. We knew about the degree of their buildup. We let our deep concern be expressed directly and forcefully to the Soviet Union. We did not know ahead of time that they would have a massive invasion of Afghanistan, as they did, but we did know that they were building up a capability for it. 
They ignored our warning. At the time the invasion commenced we began to marshal not only our own condemnation and actions to let them realize the consequences but also to marshal the support of other nations around the world. And I think the unprecedented condemnation of the Soviet Union expressed by 104 nations in the United Nations, for instance, was a good indication that other countries also condemn the Soviet Union. 
We were not caught by surprise, but there was no way to anticipate that they would actually invade Afghanistan. We did know about their high presence there and also about their buildup



National Conference on Physical Fitness and Sports for All Remarks at the Opening Session of the Conference. 
February 1, 1980

This is a time of determination, a time of sober assessment, a time of excitement, a time of challenge. I changed my prepared remarks at the last minute, because I wanted to say a few things that I think are important to the American people and particularly to you. I'd like to begin by paying a special tribute to a group that deserves the praise and support of all Americans, the United States Olympic Committee. Recently, I declared on behalf of the American people that unless the Soviet forces are withdrawn from Afghanistan, that the 1980 Olympic games should be moved from Moscow, canceled, or postponed. Both Houses of the Congress, I think speaking accurately for the American people, have concurred strongly in that judgment. And last weekend, the United States Olympic Committee voted, I believe unanimously, to support the strong national sentiment on this issue. It was not an easy decision for me, nor for the Congress, nor for the U.S. Olympic Committee. Their decision was difficult, and it was a courageous action which deserves our praise and our support

Some have said, many have said, that we should notallow politics to interfere with Olympic competition. I agree completely. But the issue now before our country and the world is not a question of politics by any reasonable definition of that word. We are not talking here about who should lead a nation. We are not talking about the internal governmental organization of a nation. We are not talking about the internal policies which a nation should follow within its own boundaries, or even what kind of political or economic system a nation might choose for itself. We are not even talking about whether a government, such as that of the Soviet Union, is repressive or not, or even—and this is difficult to say-whether it denies its people fundamental human rights, as we define them. 
And I'm determined that the United States will make clear to the Soviet Union, just as other countries are doing, that no country can trample the life and liberty of another and expect to conduct business or sports as usual with the rest of the world. We must send that message clearly to the Soviet Government and to its leaders, and let the people of the Soviet Union understand this basic principle involved. 
All Americans look upon our Olympians as representing our Nation's highest ideals. I want them all to know, and I want athletes from all around the world to know that I'm determined personally that they will have an opportunity to participate this year in international games of the highest quality, but, unless invading forces in Afghanistan are withdrawn, in a location other than the Soviet Union. I also want to make it clear that I welcome athletes from all over the world who are now coming to Lake Placid; including those from the Soviet Union, to participate in the winter Olympic games



Consumer Federation of America Remarks at the Federation's Annual Conference. 
February 7, 1980

The Soviet military aggression in Afghanistan is a serious threat to peace and has drawn the condemnation of the entire world. We must be sure that the Soviet Union understands the depth of universal concern and universal outrage. 
In my State of the Union speech, I described the consequences of a threat to our own vitalinterests in the Persian Gulf region. As long as Soviet invading forces are in Afghanistan, we will continue our own forceful actions. Normal commerce has been interrupted. There will be no high-technology equipment sold to the Soviet Union. I will not issue permits for Soviet fishermen in U.S. waters. And neither the American people nor I will support the sending of our athletes to the Olympic games in Moscow as long as the invading forces stay in Afghanistan. Americans want peace. And when we act calmly, firmly, and with strength, and when we describe clearly the advantages of peace and the absence of aggression, then we reduce the risk of war.



Meeting With Prime Minister J. Malcolm Fraser of Australia Remarks to Reporters on the Prime Minister's Departure
February 7, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. We're delighted to welcome back to the White House Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser of Australia, who came here a few days ago to consult very closely with me on matters of common interest to our two countries, but particularly the late developing events centered around the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. 
We have had a thorough discussion about the Olympics and what might be done concerning the Olympics if the Soviets do not quickly withdraw all their forces from Afghanistan, and Prime Minister Fraser has taken the lead in this discussion and consultation as well. It's with a great deal of pleasure that I welcome him back here, and I'd like to ask him as an honored guest to make a few comments to you. 



The President's News Conference
February 13, 1980
THE PRESIDENT. The crisis is a great one, precipitated by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, for several reasons. First of all, this is a crucial area of the world—to us, to our allies, and to other nations. Twothirds of all the oil exported in the entire world come from the Persian Gulf region. Secondly, it's a highly volatile, rapidly changing, unstable part of the world. Third, the Soviets have been indulging in a steady military buildup over a number of years, which has caused us concern and to which we have reacted since I've been in this office. Fourth, the Soviets—a major departure from anything they've done since the Second World War—have now exhibited a willingness to use their military forces beyond their own borders, in a massive invasion of Afghanistan. 
The reaction that I have taken to these steps are appropriate and, I believe and hope, adequate. We must convince the Soviet Union, through peaceful means, peaceful means, that they cannot invade an innocent country with impunity and they must suffer the consequences of their action. 
Everything we've done has been to contribute to stability, moderation, consistency, persistence, and peace. We have taken actions on our own, and we have asked our allies and others to join in with us in the condemnation of the Soviet Union and the demand that the Soviets withdraw from Afghanistan and to convince them that any further adventurism on their part would cause grave consequences to the Soviet Union. 
In my judgment our forces are adequate. We cannot afford to let the Soviets choose either the terrain or the tactics to be used by any other country—a nation that might be invaded, their neighbors, our allies, or ourselves—if-they should persist in their aggressive action. Those judgments would have to be made at the time. But I believe they're adequate
Senator Kennedy has also said that the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union was not only not very serious but that somehow or another the Soviets were not the culpable party, but the United States was at fault and somehow caused or contributed to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan

THE PRESIDENT. What we would like to have, first of all, is a Soviet withdrawal and a commitment, that might be verified and carried out, that the Soviets would not invade another country or use their military forces beyond their borders again to destabilize the peace. We would like to have a neutral country. If there had to be a transition phase during which a neutral and responsible government might be established acceptable to the Afghanistan people, then perhaps some peacekeeping force espoused by the United Nations, maybe comprised of Moslem military troops or otherwise, could be used during that transition phase. 
But the prime consideration that I have is to make sure that the Soviets know that their invasion is notacceptable, to marshal as much support from other nations of the world as possible, and to prevent any further threat to the peace and the cause of war. I think through strength we can maintain peace. But we've got to be resolute, we've got to be consistent, and our actions have got to be in a tone of long-range, predictable action clearly understood by the Soviet Union
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I might point out to you that I'm an incumbent Democratic President. I didn't ask for a challenger— [laughter] —but have no aversion to a campaign, as was indicated by my opening statement and is further confirmed by the fact that I have to negotiate with many other leaders around the world, including carrying out the principles of the Mideast peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, put into effect very complicated proposals like the grain embargo and a restraint on shipments of high technology equipment to the Soviet Union and the implementation of ourcommitment that athletes should not go to Moscow to participate in the Olympics as long as Soviet invasion troops are in Afghanistan. These kinds of things are very time-consuming to me.

THE PRESIDENT. We have no desire to use the Olympics to punish, except the Soviets attach a major degree of importance to the holding of the Olympics in the Soviet Union. In their own propaganda material they claim that the willingness of the International Olympics Committee to let the games be held in Moscow is an endorsement of the foreign policy and the peace-loving nature of the Soviet Union. 
To me it's unconscionable for any nation to send athletes to the capital of a nation under the aegis of the Olympics when that nation, that host nation, is actively involved in the invasion of and the subjugation of innocent people. And so, for that reason, I don't believe that we are at all obligated to send our athletes to Moscow. 
And I would like to repeat, if the Soviet Union does not withdraw its troops from Afghanistan by the 20th of this month, then neither I nor the American people nor the Congress will support the sending of an Olympic team to Moscow this summer
I might point out, too, that this will marshal an additional discussion and commitment among the American people and a realization that the peace is threatened and that everything that I am trying to do, working with the Congress and others, is to take peaceful action, preventive action, to prevent the Soviets taking further steps that might lead to a war. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't see any possibility of that
THE PRESIDENT. In general, I have been well pleased, yes. There's a remarkable degree of unanimity among all our major allies about the seriousness of the Soviet threat into Afghanistan and the actions that must be taken to counter that threat and prevent further aggression by the Soviet Union

I've had frequent conversations recently with other major European leaders about the need to strengthen our ties with Yugoslavia and to protect them as a nonaligned country, without being dominated or threatened successfully by the Soviet Union. We'll take whateveractionisnecessary to carry out those goals, but commensurate with actual need .and commensurate with specific requests from Yugoslavia itself


Meeting With Student Leaders Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session. 
February 15, 1980

Afghanistan is an additional unexpected challenge to our country. I think a matter of profound significance—the rest of the world is rallying to the same cause which we have espoused; that is, a public condemnation of the Soviets' unwarranted invasion of that country of Afghanistan and the subjugation of formerly free people under military power. 
We have responded, along with a tremendous number of other countries, through peaceful means. Every action that we have taken has been designed to enhance peace and to let the Soviets know that they cannot invade an innocent country with impunity. We've not used military power. We have it. What we've used is economic and political persuasion, joined with other countries in the United Nations and independently of us by Moslem countries assembled in Islamabad who voted 34 to nothing to condemn the Soviet Union, in the callfor their immediate withdrawal from Afghanistan
THE PRESIDENT. All right. It's hard to guess. We did not anticipate the Soviets' move into Afghanistan. This is a radical departure from the policy and actions of the Soviet Union ever since the Second World War. They have moved large troop concentrations into Hungary and Czechoslovakia to put down a resurgent effort by the citizens of those two nations, already dominated by the Soviet Union as a result of territorial acquisition or influence following the Second World War. 
But this is the first time that the Soviets have ever penetrated a country that was not previously under their domination, with Soviet troops. I think this action did deeply disturb those other countries in the region, who see a possible repetition of this kind of invasive action unless the Soviets are cautioned against moving further and castigated and condemned because of their previous actions. 
Some of those Moslem countries in Islamabad who condemned the Soviets and called for their immediate withdrawal had formerly been dominated to some degree by the Soviet Union or heavily dependent upon the Soviet Union for economic or military support. And it was an act of great courage on their part to condemn the Soviets and to callfor their withdrawal. This was not done because they are relaxed or sure about their own safety in the future; it was done because they are concerned about their own safety in the future. 
I might point out that our country has got to be a leader. I started to say "the leader." We've got to be a leader. We don't put ourselves in the forefront of the obstacle toward further Soviet invasion. The first line of defense, obviously, is the strength and integrity of the nations who border the Soviet Union, among their own people. They've got to be able and willing to defend themselves. I would say the second line of defense would be among their own neighbors, within the Moslem world perhaps. I would like to see the Moslem countries, for instance, pledge themselves that if any of their brother nations are invaded by the Soviet Union, that they would respond jointly to that threat. But there has to be some demonstration to them, either through quiet assurances or through public commitments, that our nation is also marshaled, if necessary, to respond. 
I said in the news conference the other night that we will notpermit the Soviets to choose either the tactics or the terrain. We have to keep our options flexible. And there are a series of things that we can and must do to let the world know that we will be strong—with private assurances to those countries: "If you stand firm, we will give you aid as you request it," which we're doing in the case of Turkey, which we're doing in the case of Saudi Arabia, which we're doing in the case of Pakistan and others, to try to form better friendships between those countries who might formerly have been adversaries. 
The best way we can do that is twofold. One is to let the Soviets know that they must not challenge us through further aggression against innocent people and that we are resolved to resist it. If they don't challenge us, there will be no need for mobilization. And secondly, to make sure that if we are registered, this will save us 90 to 100 days in a time of mobilization and will make the draft much less likely. I see no prospect, under present circumstances, for the need for a draft. We are not asking for additional legislation to permit me to callfor registration; that already exists. 
So, it's a part of a unilateral, multilateral, regional response to the Soviet Union, to say, "Do not go any further; withdraw your troops from this invaded country." We are not trying to bring the Soviets to their knees; we're not trying to humiliate the Soviet Union. We're trying to let them know that there is a world condemnation of what they have done. If they, with impunity, can take over this adjacent country, then my judgment is they'd be much more tempted to take a further step into Pakistan, into Iran, or into some adjacent country. I think it's excellent insurance, and I think it's needed. And we're .going to go through with it. 
We are so strong and so secure in our own entity that we can takeaction that others cannot afford to take. For instance, the grain embargo is an action against the Soviet Union that is punitive in nature but sends us severe cautionary signals. We have not sacrificed our own well-being in taking that significant action. For instance, I declared the grain embargo, I think on the 4th of January. It reduced the sale of American products to the Soviet Union by 17 million tons. The price of corn, the cash price for corn now is higher than it was in January. The price of wheat, oats, soybeans are all higher than they were then. It has not depressed the market. 
Secondly, we shipped more grain from the United States last month, in spite of the embargo against the Soviet Union, than we did a year ago. So, we can accommodate that kind of signal to the Soviet Union, which has tangible effect, when other countries don't have the grain to sell at the beginning. And if they did take the same action, they would severely hurt themselves economically. 
I've had a lot of other leaders say, "We don't believe it's proper for our country to attend the Summer Olympics in Moscow if the Soviets are in the process of having invaded Afghanistan." And they say, "We're going to join you." We've had maybe 50 nations already that said, "We do not support the Summer Olympic games in Moscow." But they couldn't get out in front of us, but they are willing to follow if we provide the lead. 
One other point I would like to make: It is not easy for a nation like ours to avoid combat. Historically speaking, mine so far, and I pray to God that it will stay, is the first in 56 years that hasn't had Americans losing their lives in combat. And we have been strong, and we have been bold. We have not ducked difficult issues. So, I am not saying that we are better than other countries, but we are a natural leader. We and the Soviets are the superpowers. And my hope is to go out of this office having kept our country at peace; to go out of this office with firm, sound friendship and detente between ourselves and the Soviet Union; to go out of this office having enhanced human rights; to go out of this office with the Nation strong and united; to go out of this office with our own people having a better quality of life; and to go out of this office with alliances and friendships firmly established with as many people as possible on Earth; and to go out of this office with nuclear arms under control. 

Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Magazine Editors. 
February 15, 1980

Internationally, the two most severe crises have been the ones that we've had to face the last 3 months or so—the incarceration of our hostages in Iran and the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union. This has put an extraordinary, additional responsibility on our country, as a world leader and as a nation deeply concerned about the safety and the freedom of these 50 American people

We're committed to the preservation of detente. Once the Soviet troops are withdrawn from Afghanistan and the threat of military action by them is removed, then we'll be very glad to pursue aggressively again further progress in the control of weapons and in the strengthening of our ties with all nations on Earth

Obviously, there are sharp differences of character among our different nations, different relationships with the Soviet Union, with China, and so forth, and also different compositions of governments. Some of our major allies, for instance, are formed with coalition governments, where you have two different parties—one represented by the Prime Minister, a completely different party and a potential political competitor represented as, say, the Foreign Minister

But I think, to summarize, I am well pleased at the basic agreement that we now enjoy with our allies and friends, the basic compatibility between our position and that of, say, 34 Moslem nations who acted independently in their own conference at Islamabad in condemning the Soviet Union and demanding the Soviets withdraw from Afghanistan, and the almost universal support that we've had in the importunities and demands that the Iranians release the American hostages. 
We have to be the world leader. We can take a stand on the Olympics or on grain embargoes or interruption of commerce or on tighter restraints on high technology equipment or the prohibition against Soviet fishing rights easier than some of our other allied countries can. 
THE PRESIDENT. They've gone along with most of them. They have all agreed not to replace any withheld shipments to the Soviet Union. We are agreeing now to tighten up on the framework of regulations that prohibit the shipment of high technology items to the Soviet Union. I think you're going to see a major response among our allies and others, too, about not going to the Olympics in Moscow, with Soviet invasion troops in Afghanistan. 
Most of those allies, as you know, don't have any appreciable amount of grain that they can withhold from shipment to the Soviet Union. We're able to do this. As a matter of fact, the prices of grain in the United States since January 4, when I declared the grain embargo, have gone up—corn, soybeans, oats, wheat. Our shipments of grain—actual shipments, out of coastal ports, of grain—have continued to be higher the last month than they were a year ago when we were making major shipments to the Soviet Union. We will set an all-time record of grain shipments this year compared to a year ago. Last year we set an all-time record. The previous year we set an all-time record in spite of the interruption of shipments of grain to the Soviet Union. 
So, we can takeaction that punishes the Soviet Union or cautions the Soviet Union, without having it be devastating to us economically; some of our allies cannot. They don't have items of value to withhold, and they are not economically able to withhold even those sensitive items with the degree of commitment that we can exhibit. 
My own belief is that we can best avoid a major national mobilization, including the draft, by being prepared to do so if necessary. I think it will not only .caution the Soviet Union against making it necessary for us to mobilize to meet further aggression on their part, but it will also mean that we are better prepared to mobilize rapidly and therefore would not need to impose the draft as early.


American Legion Remarks at the Legion's Annual Conference. 
February 19, 1980

We've also negotiated a sound strategic arms limitation treaty, SALT II, which has great advantages for our country. It will enhance world stability and peace. SALT II will continue the process of arms control which was begun by President Eisenhower and which has been continued by every President since his time. 
It will help to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons among the other nations on Earth. It will force substantial reduction in the present numbers of Soviet missile launchers, and provides no similar requirement that missile launchers of the United States be reduced. It will enhance the ability that we have to monitor the Soviet nuclear forces. It will prevent an expensive and a dangerous nuclear arms race, an arms race that would be counterproductive both for ourselves and for the Soviet Union, and would require funding, very high levels of funding, which are needed to improve the American conventional forces. 
SALT II is not a panacea. It is a supplement and not a substitute for a strong defense. SALT II is not based on trust; it can be verified by our own national technical means. I will consult very closely with the Congress when the time comes again to move toward ratification of the treaty
Also, at this very moment some 100,000 Soviet troops, heavily armed, seek to subjugate a proud and a once independent nation, a nation that presented no challenge to Soviet security and wanted only to retain their freedom. This Soviet invasion of Afghanistan poses a threat to the independence of countries throughout Southwest Asia and to the economic lifeblood of many nations—oil. It has altered the careful balance of forces in a vital and a volatile area of the world. 
That's why I did not hesitate to answer Soviet aggression with strong economic sanctions, including restrictions on grain shipments and sales of high technology to the Soviet Union. That's why we joined with more than a hundred other nations in the United Nations to condemn this aggression and to demand withdrawal of the Soviet invasion forces from Afghanistan. 
And that is why I have given notice that the United States will not attend the Moscow Olympics unless the Soviet invasion forces are withdrawn from Afghanistan before February 20. That deadline is tomorrow, and it will not be changed
And finally, I've served clear notice, in my State of the Union message, and I would like to quote the words: "An attempt by any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault on the vitalinterests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled by any meansnecessary, including military force

At this time I am strengthening our own military presence in the Persian Gulf region, and we are encouraging other nations to form a cooperative security framework, which can enhance their independence and help to preserve regional peace. 
To underscore ourresolve and our readiness, I've stepped up our overall defense effort and proposed registration for draft-age Americans. I've made it clear that there is no need at this time to reimpose the draft, but registration is a necessary precaution which will expedite mobilization if it should be required in, the future
It's important that everyone understand that every action I have taken is peaceful and is designed to preserve peace. Because we seek peace, we have pursued and will pursue every opportunity to ease tensions. Because we seek peace, we have been cautious and restrained. Because we seek peace, we must leave no room for doubt among our allies and no room for miscalculation among our potential adversaries. 
It is obvious that the Soviet leaders did miscalculate in Afghanistan. They underestimated the courage and the tenacity of freedom fighters in that country. and they did not anticipate the world's quick and forceful response to their aggression. They are now paying a high price—in the number of casualties in Afghanistan, in our own actions, in the actions of our allies, and the condemnation of virtually the entire Muslim and Third World community in the United Nations and in their individual and collective statements and actions. 
There is no way for you or me to know the future plans of the Soviet leaders. We cannot 'be certain if or when they will withdraw their forces, if they seek colonial domination only in Afghanistan, or if they seek other conquests as well. No President of the United States can afford to gamble our peace and security upon wishful thinking about the present or the future intentions of the Soviet Union. 
But we do know that our intentions must be crystal clear. We will stand firm against aggression, and we will notaccept business as usual with the Soviet Union while the invasion continues. Our firmness is not a prelude to combat, nor is it a return to the cold war. It is simply prudence—to reduce the chances for a misjudgment that could be fatal to peace. It's a reaffirmation of a longstanding commitment and a sustained response to a strategic challenge. 
Our measured reaction to this aggression fortunately comes at a time when our military strength is unequaled and growing, in keeping with the commitment that I made to you in 1976
I would like to reemphasize that from the very start, my administration, in cooperation with the Congress, has been engaged in a substantial and carefully planned strengthening of our military forces. In December of last year—well before the Soviet invasion—the Secretary of Defense presented to the Congress the broad outlines of my plans for defense spending, not only in 1981 but for the next 5 years. And last month I submitted officially the strong budget proposal itself. 
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has made everyone more aware of the importance of a strong defense capability. But since the process of strengthening our military forces has been underway for several years, the recent developments in Southwest Asia do not now require any major redesign of next year's defense budget; of course, we will continue to review our requirements and make any necessary adjustments to meet changing circumstances. 
I consider the increase in the defense budget for fiscal year 1981 to be necessary to assure our national security. It's a carefully measured amount, and it in no way signals a new or transient "boom" in defense spending. It's estimated, quite accurately, that the Soviet Union spends 13 percent of their gross national income or gross national product on defense. The percentage of our own gross national product represented by defense expenditures for 1981 is about 5 percent. And that share will hardly vary at all if the present projections of our defense expenditures are carried out in 1982, '83, '84, and '85—about 5 percent of our GNP. The impact of this additional expenditure on the inflation rate will be negligible. 
These expenditures for defense are clearly within the capability of our American economy, and moreover, we are spending our money well. We're strengthening our strategic triad that deters the Soviet nuclear threat. 
I accelerated development of cruise missiles, which begin production this year. Because of their small size and the large numbers, cruise missiles will be far more effective than the B-1 bomber for penetrating Soviet air defenses now or those they can project in the future. We've initiated a new MX missile system and finally resolved schedule and contract problems that had stalled the Trident submarine program for so long. The first Trident was launched last year, and six more are under construction. 
Because we have emphasized a stronger NATO, which had languished, as you know, during the Vietnam war, we now have commitments from our NATO partners for an annual 3-percent real growth in their own defense budgets. We've begun joint development of new weapons. We've enhanced our ability for rapid deployment of ground and air forces in Europe in a crisis and have spurred modernization of NATO theater nuclear weapons to meet a threatening buildup of formidable Soviet nuclear missiles in that region of the world. Our NATO Allies keep about 3 million troops on active duty; added to our 2 million, we can and we will maintain a powerful and effective force for the defense of Western Europe. You can depend on that, because it is vital to our own Nation's defense.

Visit of President Daniel T. arap Moi of Kenya Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony. 
February 20, 1980

We've been particularly grateful to see the leadership shown by President Moi and the people of Kenya, along with the nonaligned countries throughout the world, in condemning the brutal invasion by the Soviet Union of Afghanistan, and the staunch demand by others, led by President Moi, that these invasion forces be withdrawn from Afghanistan


Visit of President Moi of Kenya Toasts at the State Dinner. 
February 20, 1980

Kenya announced on their own initiative, after consideration of the principles on which their nation was formed, that they would not attend the Summer Olympics in Moscow, because the Soviets had invaded Afghanistan and taken away the freedom of the people of that country


Energy and National Security Remarks at a White House Briefing for Community Leaders. 
February 21, 1980

The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan would have been of deep concern to us underanycircumstances, and the holding of American hostages would have been of deep concern to us underanycircumstances. But the fact that both these actions have taken place in the Persian Gulf region means that we not only have a deep concern but the vitalinterests of our country, our security is dangerously threatened


United Jewish Appeal Remarks at the Organization's National Young Leadership Conference
February 25, 1980

This is an exciting day for me, to come here and to see the spirit and dedication, the hope, the idealism, the common purpose, the exemplification of the ideals of our Nation which permeate this audience, and to go, in just a few minutes, to greet the winner of five gold medals in speed skating and an American hockey team that whipped the Soviets and went on to bring the gold medal to our people. This is a wonderful weekend for me and a wonderful morning for me as well

And finally, let me add that my policy of promoting human rights throughout the world remains firm. In 3 years we have made this an important matter on the world agenda. I don't believe this issue escapes the constant notice and awareness of any leader in any nation on Earth. Rather than look the other way, for instance, we have insisted that the Soviet Union live up to its public promises, made in the Helsinki accords, to protect the political and the social rights of its own citizens and of others. Support for human rights, like support for Israel, is an expression of basic American ideals


United States Olympic Team Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for Participants in the 1980 Winter Games. 
February 25, 1980

Immediately after the hockey game between the United States and the Soviet Union, I placed a call to Herb Brooks, congratulated him and the team, told him how proud we were of all of them, and invited this group to come to the White House. He said, "Mr. President, we've got another game to play Sunday morning, and I can't promise that we'll come until we see how that event goes." And I said, "Well, if you can come, we'd certainly like for you to do so." [Laughter] He said, "Well, after the Olympics are over, I think there are some buses that will be available at Lake Placid to bring us to the White House." [Laughter] And I said, "If you don't mind, Herb, I think I'll send a couple of planes to pick you up." [Laughter] So, here they are. And we're very proud of them

The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has violated peace and the principles of the Olympics. And it has caused us to make a motion that the Olympics be moved or postponed this summer. I intend to meet soon with a representative group of our summer athletes to talk to them about an alternative world-class competition for them this summer that does not harm Olympic principles and will not harm future Olympic games


Order of the American Hellenic Educational Progressive Association Remarks at the Annual Dinner of the Supreme Lodge. 
February 25, 1980

Soviet troops in Afghanistan at this moment attempt to subjugate a freedom loving and deeply religious people. And this is a painful reminder of the period in which we live. It also is a reminder of the time shortly after World War II, when a threat from the same source was of deep concern to Greece and to the adjacent countries. United States resolve, expressed in the Truman Doctrine, and the unity of the Allies—my allies, your allies, the allies of the people of Greece today-halted that threat. And today, in a vastly different world, United States resolve and unity among Greece, the United States, and other allies will help to preserve the freedom and independence of human beings and of nations which are threatened by subjugation.

Soviet troops are still in Afghanistan, a diametrically opposite kind of philosophy being exerted by military force in an attempt to stamp out freedom, with a callous disregard for human life. The United States has responded to these challenges with firmness, with restraint, and with resolve. Unlike our adversaries, we've acted as responsible members of the international community, basing our actions on international law

I think all of you realize that the Olympic games this summer should not be held in Moscow, because Russia is an invading nation. To do so would violate those very principles of peace and of brotherhood and of nonpolitical alignment of those who participate in the games—exactly the kind of defects that would be corrected with a permanent site established as I've just described



Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
February 25, 1980

We don't know how soon we'll be able to resolve any of these problems—inflation, energy, hostages, Soviet aggression in Afghanistan—but we are acting in a persistent fashion, a clear fashion, an open fashion, an understandable fashion. We're getting as much unified support in our own country as possible, and support from around the world. Every action that I've taken has been designed toward peace and toward the resolution of these problems with peaceful means

THE PRESIDENT. I would say about half the international conflicts in history, in recorded history, have been caused by a misjudgment on the part of a potential aggressor nation concerning the reaction of other countries or peoples. We've tried to make our position very clear. We've not acted unilaterally except through economic sanctions. 
We had political, economic, and military action as options open to us, to me. Our grain embargo, the termination of the sale of high technology equipment, other similar actions to put more restraints on commerce with the Soviet Union have been clear, unequivocal, and well understood. We've had good support among our allies in this respect. Politically, we've acted through the United Nations. And I think that you notice that 103 other countries joined us in the condemnation of the Soviets' action and the callfor the Soviets to withdraw their invading forces from Afghanistan. 
We have not been the leaders, but we have certainly approved and encouraged, whenever appropriate, regional action of a similar nature. Thirty-four countries assembled themselves in Islamabad-Moslem countries—and they voted unanimously, in much stronger terms than the U.N. used, to condemn the Soviets and to demand the withdrawal of Soviet troops. Some of these countries were either subservient to or heavily dependent upon the Soviet Union for economic and military aid. 
We've been persistent in not yielding our position as events proceeded. I think the Soviets made a serious miscalculation, not only in our own actions and the world reaction but also in the intensity with which the freedom-loving people of Afghanistan have resisted the Soviet domination. 
The Soviets continue to build up their troop placements in Afghanistan. They only control, really, most of the major highways and some of the major cities. They've been, I'm sure, very unpleasantly surprised at the refusal of most of the Afghan military forces to cooperate with the Soviets. A lot of them have defected, taken their weapons with them, and are now opposed to the Soviet Union. There's been a substantial loss of life, both among the military and civilian population of Afghanistan and also among the Soviet invaders. 
We don't want to return to the cold war; we don't want to have a confrontation with the Soviet Union. But it's imperative that we make it clear that we will protect American interests in Southwest Asia. We would like for the Soviets to withdraw. We certainly did not precipitate the incident in Afghanistan. We played no role at all, now or in the past, that would cause any concern to the Soviet Union about their own security. 
So, the Soviets have tried to mislead the world; they have failed. They have tried to invade a country and subjugate it quickly, but they have failed. And in my opinion, the best thing that we can do is to remain firm, united, peaceful, persistent, clear in what our position is. And I believe that's the best way to encourage peace and to enhance the peace that we already have maintained.
THE PRESIDENT. Immediately after the Soviet-American hockey match the other night, I called Herb Brooks, the coach of the U.S. Olympic team, and congratulated him and then told him how proud the Americans were of their victory. His first response was, "Mr. President, we want you to know that we stand firmly with you in your attitude toward the Olympics games not being held in Moscow this summer." 
I can't claim that Herb Brooks speaks for the entire American Olympic team, but I do believe that the overwhelming support that I've so far seen in America will not wane for our refusal to go to the Olympics in Moscow, the Soviets being an invading nation against Afghanistan. We have seen no evidence at all that the Soviets are contemplating withdrawal of their troops; on the contrary, because of unanticipated opposition, their troop levels are being built up
THE PRESIDENT. What we've tried to do so far is not to prepare for an inevitable conflict, but to takeaction to prevent a confrontation with the Soviet Union. I think that the surest way to prevent further aggression by the Soviets is to let them know that their present aggression into Afghanistan has been counterproductive, that they have suffered serious consequences, and that the world is aroused against the Soviet Union's action in a very clear and unmistakable way. 
As I said in my last press conference, we would not yield to the Soviets the choice of either terrain or tactics. We would not let the Soviets choose a particular place for a response to aggression to be mounted. And we would not let them determine the tactics to be used in resisting their future aggression. But we let the Turks and the Iranians and the Pakistanis know that if they need our help, then that help is available.
THE PRESIDENT. We don't have any evidence of that delivery of tanks to the Palestinian terrorists in southern Lebanon, but I can't certify that they have not delivered some tanks

THE PRESIDENT. Well, when Vice President Mondale and Secretary Bergland and other members of my Cabinet and my family came to Iowa after we imposed the grain embargo against the Soviet Union, they gave that pledge. Subsequently, as you know, the U.S. Government assumed the responsibility of purchasing grain in fairly large quantities and providing CCC [Commodity Credit Corporation] loans where the farmers had difficulty marketing their grain at the so-called country elevators. 
We will constantly monitor the question of price-support levels, target-support levels, storage capability, and storage payments on farms, and also try to enhance the sale of American grain to compensate for the loss of sales to the Soviet Union. And in the entire gamut of agriculture policy, we will constantly remember the impact of the embargo, on the Midwestern farmers primarily, because they were the ones primarily affected on both corn and wheat. 
Another thing that we've done is to accentuate our effort to sell grain to our previous customers at a higher level-Mexico, Japan—and to open up new markets, like in China. 
So, we are making every effort to make sure that no one suffers in an inordinate way. But I have to say that all Americans, either through paying taxes to finance the higher expenditures in agriculture or otherwise, are required to share in some level of sacrifice to meet the Soviet threat


National Governors' Association Toast at a White House Dinner Honoring Governors Attending the Association's Winter Session. 
February 26, 1980

And I think our Nation has also exhibited a reservoir of strength in facing the Soviet threat to our own vitalinterests in Southwest Asia when, in an unprecedented fashion, they invaded the freedom-loving, deeply religious country of Afghanistan. There's a sharp difference between that action and our own concern about our innocent Americans, who are presently, at this moment, being held prisoner. 
We have not taken any steps that would lead to war or to conflict. Every action that our country has taken has been designed for peace. Every action has been peaceful in nature. Our opportunities are diverse and substantial, but they are confined to either economic or political or military action. We've not taken military action. We're prepared to do so if necessary, but we've not had to. But we have taken economic action unilaterally, and we've had adequate support from our allies and friends, many of whom are not as strong as we, some of whom are quite vulnerable and not as free to act as we. 
We've taken political action. And there have been overwhelming expressions of concern about the Soviet Union's invasion, both with the 103 other nations who joined with us in the United Nations to condemn the Soviets' action and demand an immediate withdrawal of troops, and also independently of us, to a major degree, among the 34 Moslem countries who met in Islamabad and condemned the Soviets even more stringently and demanded more urgently that they withdraw from Afghanistan. Some of them are almost subservient to the Soviet Union, heavily dependent upon the Soviet Union, but they acted out of conviction and with a great deal of courage and with strength. 
No one can predict any time schedule for the resolution of these issues, and I would certainly not deign to do so. But I think to the extent that our country is unified, is strong, our purposes are clear, our voice can be heard and understood, and a maximum support can be aroused among other nations—allies, friends, nonaligned countries, small, weak countries-to that extent, we will prevail and preserve the essence, freedom, and the individual life and also the independence and freedom of nations who might be threatened because they are relatively weak and relatively vulnerable


Visit of Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of the Federal Republic of Germany Remarks to Reporters Following a Meeting
March 5, 1980

We have been particularly involved together in recent months, after the American hostages were seized in Iran and since the Soviets have invaded Afghanistan. The Federal Republic of Germany has made its position clear both in the United Nations on several occasions, in these private consultations, and through their public actions.


Visit of Chancellor Schmidt of the Federal Republic of Germany Toasts at the State Dinner. 
March 5, 1980

Later, of course, I think Helmut was the first one to recognize the growing threat to Western Europe and to the NATO alliance of the unpublicized buildup of Soviet theater nuclear weapons. And he presented the case very clearly to the rest of us, and we began to study this issue more thoroughly. And eventually he exerted again his strong leadership in Western Europe to encourage our allies to work with us in committing ourselves jointly to meet this threat in a carefully planned, moderate, but effective way, not to cause an escalation in tension or an escalation in division among us, but to cause us to address the question in the most effective possible fashion. 
We recognize that there are serious threats to stability and that we have come, in this last few years, to value highly the benefits of detente and to recognize clearly that in spite of all of our other possible diversion of issues that are important, the control of weaponry and the control of nuclear weaponry must be at the top of our agenda. These commitments have been shaken, but not changed, by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. 
We are still committed to detente. We are still committed to avoid a resumption of the cold war. We are still committed to the control of nuclear and conventional weapons: We are still committed to cooperation among nations on Earth. We are still committed to stability and to peace. And we are still committed to making sure that every action we take to alleviate crises is a peaceful action and is a constructive action that will help to achieve our goals without violating these deep commitments and principles on which our Nation's policies have been founded


White House Briefing on Administration Policies Remarks to a Group of Civic and Community Leaders From New York. 
March 11, 1980

A second foreign affairs matter which concerns me very deeply is the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. I know Dr. Brzezinski has talked to you earlier. But this is a major challenge to world stability, to world peace, and ultimately to our own security. This invasion of Afghanistan directly threatens one of the most vital and strategically important regions of the world. 
Every action that I have taken has been designed to preserve peace, and every action I have taken has been peaceful in nature. We obviously have a wide range of options—economic, political, military-but we've chosen to exercise only those economic and political options that would preserve the support of other nations on Earth, keep our Nation at peace, and not violate, again, our principles or our best interests. 
It is a delicate situation. We are resolved to stand firm, and I think we've made good progress, because 103 other nations in addition to us have condemned the Soviet invasion, called for the immediate withdrawal of the Soviet troops from Afghanistan. And, of course, the Moslem countries, many of whom have been dependent upon the Soviet Union or closely allied with the Soviet Union, have also joined in a much stronger condemnation of what the Soviets did


The President's News Conference
March 14, 1980
THE PRESIDENT. The agreement which we presently have with the Soviet Union, which I intend to honor as long as they reciprocate, is to comply with all the terms of the interim SALT agreement, which is known as SALT I. 
SALT II has been signed by me and President Brezhnev. I consider it binding on our two countries. It has not yet been ratified. We will observe very closely to make sure that the Soviets comply with this agreement. I will not ask the Senate to ratify SALT II until I have a chance to consult very closely with the congressional leadership on the Senate side, particularly Majority Leader Byrd and others who work with him, both Democrats and Republicans. 
Because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan it is obvious that we would not be successful in ratifying SALT II treaty at this time. It is still on the calendar. It will not be brought up until after that consultation takes place. I will also continue to consult with congressional leadership as far as compliance with SALT II is concerned. 
But my present intention, within the bounds of reciprocal action on the Soviet Union and consultations with the Senate and, to some degree, the House leadership, I intend to comply with the provisions of SALT II. 
THE PRESIDENT. Ordinarily, when a treaty is signed between the heads of two nations, the presumption is that the treaty will be honored on both sides absent some further development. One further development that would cause me to renounce the treaty would be after consulting with the Members of the Senate to determine an interest of our Nation that might cause such a rejection, in which case I would notify the Soviet Union that the terms of the treaty were no longer binding. 
So, there will be two provisos in the continued honoring of the SALT II treaty. One is that the Soviets reciprocate completely, as verified by us, and secondly, that the consultations that I will continue with the Senate leadership confirm me in my commitment that it's in the best interests of our country to do so.




