MID 20002, US v Egypt, 7 sep to 7-Oct-56 to 6-Nov-56



205 - The President's News Conference
September 11, 1956

THE PRESIDENT. Well, as you know, from the beginning our country has been dedicated to a peaceful solution of the Suez controversy. 
Largely through the efforts of Secretary Dulles the 18-nation proposal was compiled and taken to President Nasser, who rejected it flatly, not only to Secretary Dulles' great disappointment, but certainly to mine and, I believe, to all of the whole world that is interested in this thing, because that plan did represent the ideas of the 18 nations the way the sovereignty of Egypt could be protected and observed, and still the rights guaranteed under the Constantinople convention of 1888 be exercised by the individuals. 
Incidentally, in that presentation the Committee of Five did an extraordinary job. We owe them a debt, and particularly, Prime Minister Menzies. He was a model of tact and patience, diplomacy. So now we have come to the point where apparently Mr. Nasser is making a proposal. But, so far as I know to this moment, his proposal said nothing but "Let's have a conference." 
There is no substantive point on which to base a conference. There are no details of time or place or anything else that I know of. 
Nevertheless, any suggestions he makes will be earnestly studied in this government, and in the meantime we remain in the closest kind of diplomatic consultation with a number of governments on what should be the next move to make. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Miss Montgomery, I don't know exactly what you mean by "backing them." 
As you know, this country will not go to war ever while I am occupying my present post unless the Congress is called into session, and Congress declares such a war; the only exception to that would be in the case of unexpected and unwarranted attack on this Nation, where self-defense itself would dictate some quick response while you call Congress into action. 
So, as far as going into any kind of military action under present conditions, of course, we are not. 
Now, if, after all peaceful means are exhausted, there is some kind of aggression on the part of Egypt against a peaceful use of the canal, you might say that we would recognize that Britain and France had no other recourse than to continue to use it even if they had to be more forceful than merely sailing through it. 
There are so many things that can occur that I believe it is best to say we are consulting with other nations on every possible line of action that could occur. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I would put it this way: I am certain that it will be referred to the U. N. before anything which you could call more positive--physical, positive steps are taken. I don't know whether this is the exact time. 
The only thing I can do is repeat my statement: we are consulting with all our associates throughout the world on this to see what is the very best next thing.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, every time that any difficulty like this occurs, there are things in motion that are stopped or hurried up. I suppose you could call them economic sanctions. 
A program of economic sanctions has never been placed before me as of this moment, never. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't know about management. All that the 1888 treaty says is: These nations are guaranteed the free use of the canal. Now, if they are guaranteed the free use--and it then provides methods by which cooperation with Egypt may be achieved--I think that they are justified probably in taking steps and conferring with President Nasser looking toward the free use of the canal. But that doesn't mean that they are justified at that moment in using force. I think this: We established the United Nations to abolish aggression, and I am not going to be a party to aggression if it is humanly possible to avoid it or I can detect it before it occurs



216 - The President's News Conference
September 27, 1956

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course, that is a black mark that has stood there for a long time. I personally think it is most unjust, and I believe it is not in accord with the 1888 treaty. 
The great hope is now this: that the users of the canal, showing such a unanimity in what they believe should be a proper, let's say, set of rules, the procedures to be observed, that Egypt will see that her own best interests lie in the same way--because these 18 nations, I believe they account for more than 90 percent of the traffic that goes through that canal. 
Now, if they are successful in getting an ad hoc method, a provisional method of operation, and finally can get something that is at least similar to or, let's say, represents the principles made in the first proposal, I would think this particular thing should be cured at the same time.







235 - The President's News Conference
October 11, 1956

It has been alleged in respect to this Suez Canal affair that the American policy has not been clear and firm. This is an error. 
From the very first day that we took up this question there were certain principles that guided us, and those principles were enunciated in that 18-power agreement that was sent by a committee to Cairo. 
Those principles were four in number. As I remember they, of course, respected Egyptian sovereignty; they insisted upon the efficient operation of the Canal; and they pointed out as the, you might say, the central principle that the Canal could not be operated for the political purposes of any one single country. They provided, also, for fair and increasing share of the profits to Egypt and profits to no one else. 
Those are the principles that have guided us throughout. 
The 18-nation program that was sent to Cairo was a plan that, it was believed by those 18 nations, would effectually carry out these principles. But it was never implied by any manner of means that these details were notnegotiable as long as the four principles were observed



241 - Television Broadcast: "The People Ask the President."
October 12, 1956

The progress made in the settlement of the Suez dispute this afternoon at the United Nations is most gratifying. Egypt, Britain and France have met, through their foreign ministers, and agreed on a set of principles on which to negotiate; and it looks like here is a very great crisis that is behind us. I don't mean to say that we are completely out of the woods, but I talked to the Secretary of State just before I came over here tonight and I will tell you that in both his heart and mine at least, there is a very great prayer of thanksgiving



268 - Radio and Television Broadcast: "The Women Ask the President."
October 24, 1956

Now, on top of this, we have this Suez Canal, which we thought was all settled until 1968 because the treaty of 1888 says that until 1968 it is going to be done this way. I think no one can challenge the legal right of Egypt to nationalize the Canal, but unquestionably there is involved in it the point, not only the point of national prestige but the point of personal prestige. 
So here you have got this great waterway on which so much of the economy of the world depends, particularly all of the shipping nations. For example, there is an average, I think, of almost fifty ships a day going through that waterway- The commerce of the nations is dependent on it. When these nations all see that passageway sort of threatened, and their economy is threatened, which would mean a depression of some kind for them, they get very excited. We are not as heavily involved as are most, but still I think we have about 2 1/2 percent of that, so it is a very complicated question. You can talk on it all afternoon, I assure you



282 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on the Developments in Eastern Europe and the Middle East.
October 31, 1956

This situation recently was aggravated by Egyptian policy including rearmament with Communist weapons. We felt this to be a misguided policy on the part of the Government of Egypt. The State of Israel, at the same time, felt increasing anxiety for its safety. And Great Britain and France feared more and more that Egyptian policies threatened their "life line" of the Suez Canal. 
These matters came to a crisis on July 26th of this year, when the Egyptian Government seized the Universal Suez Canal Company. For ninety years--ever since the inauguration of the Canal--that Company has operated the Canal, largely under British and French technical supervision. 
Now there were some among our allies who urged an immediate reaction to this event by use of force. We insistently urged otherwise, and our wish prevailed--through a long succession of conferences and negotiations for weeks--even months--with participation by the United Nations. And there, in the United Nations, only a short while ago, on the basis of agreed principles, it seemed that an acceptable accord was within our reach. 
But the direct relations of Egypt with both Israel and France kept worsening to a point at which first Israel--then France-and Great Britain also--determined that, in their judgment, there could be no protection of their vitalinterests without resort to force. 
Upon this decision, events followed swiftly. On Sunday the Israeli Government ordered total mobilization. On Monday, their armed forces penetrated deeply into Egypt and to the vicinity of the Suez Canal, nearly one hundred miles away. And on Tuesday, the British and French Governments delivered a 12-hour ultimatum to Israel and Egypt--now followed up by armed attack against Egypt


The United States was not consulted in any way about any phase of these actions. Nor were we informed of them in advance. 
In the circumstances I have described, there will be no United States involvement in these present hostilities. I therefore have no plan to call the Congress in Special Session. Of course, we shall continue to keep in contact with Congressional leaders of both parties. 
I assure you, your government will remain alert to every possibility of this situation, and keep in close contact and coordination with the Legislative Branch of this government. 
At the same time it is--and it will remain--the dedicated purpose of your government to do all in its power to localize the fighting and to end the conflict. 
We took our first measure in this action yesterday. We went to the United Nations with a request that the forces of Israel return to their own land and that hostilities in the area be brought to a close. This proposal was not adopted--because it was vetoed by Great Britain and by France. 
The processes of the United Nations, however, are not exhausted. It is our hope and intent that this matter will be brought before the United Nations General Assembly. There-with no veto operating--the opinion of the world can be brought to bear in our quest for a just end to this tormenting problem. In the past the United Nations has proved able to find a way to end bloodshed. We believe it can and that it will do so again



283 - Address in Convention Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
November 1, 1956

And now, in these last days, we have heard other sounds of less happy portent. We have heard--with deep dismay--the crack of rifle-fire and the whine of jet-bombers over the deserts of Egypt

The United Nations--within 48 hours of its being called to consider the matter of foreign--Soviet--forces in Hungary-was called to judge the use of foreign forces in Egypt. 
I, as your President, am proud--and I trust that you are proud--that the United States declared itself against the use of force in, not one, but both these cases




290 - Remarks at the Headquarters of the Republican National Committee.
November 5, 1956

In any event, no matter what happens, I think we should not think of it too much as the time for rejoicing. Friends of ours, people in Eastern Europe, are enslaved and suffering, and there are still threats to the peace existing in Egypt. So we have not only to work for elections, to see that each citizen, so far as he can, does his duty on that day, but to study what it is that is going on in the world and how we may best help and make certain our own nation shall always preserve the path of honor






