MID 223101, US v USSR, 25 sep to 25-Oct-83 to 20-May-84




Remarks at the Annual Pulaski Day Banquet in New York, New York 
September 25, 1983

Recently, the Soviet massacre of 269 airline passengers shocked the civilized world. But Polish Americans know all about the brutal nature of the regime that has controlled the Soviet Union since 1917. You know that downing a passenger airliner is totally consistent with a government that murdered 15,000 Polish officers in the Katyn forest. We cannot let the world forget that crime, and we will not


Address Before the 38th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York, New York 
September 26, 1983

At the time of my last visit here, I expressed hope that a whole class of weapons systems, the longer range INF—intermediate nuclear forces—could be banned from the face of the Earth. I believe that to relieve the deep concern of peoples in both Europe and Asia, the time was ripe, for the first time in history, to resolve a security threat exclusively through arms control. I still believe the elimination of these weapons-the zero option—is the best, fairest, most practical solution to the problem. Unfortunately, the Soviet Union declined to accept the total elimination of this class of weapons. 
When I was here last, I hoped that the critical strategic arms reduction talks would focus, and urgently so, on those systems that carry the greatest risk of nuclear war—the fast-flying, accurate, intercontinental ballistic missiles which pose a first-strike potential. I also hoped the negotiations could reduce by one-half the number of strategic missiles on each side and reduce their warheads by one-third. Again, I was disappointed when the Soviets declined to consider such deep cuts, and refused as well to concentrate on these most dangerous, destabilizing weapons. 
Well, despite the rebuffs, the United States has not abandoned and will not abandon the search for meaningful arms control agreements. Last June 1 proposed a new approach toward the START negotiations. We did not alter our objective of substantial reductions, but we recognized that there are a variety of ways to achieve this end. During the last round of Geneva talks, we presented a draft treaty which responded to a number of concerns raised by the Soviet Union. We will continue to build upon this initiative. 
Similarly, in our negotiations on intermediate-range nuclear forces, when the Soviet leaders adamantly refused to consider the total elimination of these weapons, the United States made a new offer. We proposed, as an interim solution, some equal number on both sides between zero and 572. We recommended the lowest possible level. Once again, the Soviets refused an equitable solution and proposed instead what might be called a "half zero option"-zero for us and many hundreds of warheads for them. And that's where things stand today, but I still haven't given up hope that the Soviet Union will enter into serious negotiations. 
We are determined to spare no effort to achieve a sound, equitable, and verifiable agreement. And for this reason, I have given new instructions to Ambassador Nitze in Geneva, telling him to put forward a package of steps designed to advance the negotiations as rapidly as possible. These initiatives build on the interim framework the United States advanced last March and address concerns that the Soviets have raised at the bargaining table in the past. 
Specifically, first, the United States proposes a new initiative on global limits. If the Soviet Union agrees to reductions and limits on a global basis, the United States for its part will not offset the entire Soviet global missile deployment through U.S. deployments in Europe. We would, of course, retain the right to deploy missiles elsewhere. 
Second, the United States is prepared to be more flexible on the content of the current talks. The United States will consider mutually acceptable ways to address the Soviet desire that an agreement should limit aircraft as well as missiles. 
Third, the United States will address the mix of missiles that would result from reductions. In the context of reductions to equal levels, we are prepared to reduce the number of Pershing II ballistic missiles as well as ground-launched cruise missiles. 
I have decided to put forward these important initiatives after full and extensive consultations with our allies, including personal correspondence I've had with the leaders of the NATO governments and Japan and frequent meetings of the NATO Special Consultative Group. I have also stayed in close touch with other concerned friends and allies. The door to an agreement is open. Itistime for the Soviet Union to walk through it. 
I want to make an unequivocal pledge to those gathered today in this world arena. The United States seeks and will accept any equitable, verifiable agreement that stabilizes forces at lower levels than currently exist. We're ready to be flexible in our approach, indeed, willing to compromise. We cannot, however, especially in light of recent events, compromise on the necessity of effective verification. 
Reactions to the Korean airliner tragedy are a timely reminder of just how different the Soviets' concept of truth and international cooperation is from that of the rest of the world. Evidence abounds that we cannot simply assume that agreements negotiated with the Soviet Union will be fulfilled. We negotiated the Helsinki Final Act, but the promised freedoms have not been provided, and those in the Soviet Union who sought to monitor their fulfillment languish in prison. We negotiated a biological weapons convention, but deadly yellow rain and other toxic agents fall on Hmong villages and Afghan encampments. We have negotiated arms agreements, but the high level of Soviet encoding hides the information needed for their verification. A newly discovered radar facility and a new ICBM raise serious concerns about Soviet compliance with agreements already negotiated. 
Peace cannot be served by pseudo arms control. We need reliable, reciprocal reductions. I callupon the Soviet Union today to reduce the tensions it has heaped on the world in the past few weeks and to show a firm commitment to peace by coming to the bargaining table with a new understanding of its obligations. I urge it to match our flexibility. If the Soviets sit down at the bargaining table seeking genuine arms reductions, there will be arms reductions. The governments of the West and their people will not be diverted by misinformation and threats. The time has come for the Soviet Union to show proof that it wants arms control in reality, not just in rhetoric. 
Meaningful arms control agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union would make our world less dangerous; so would a number of confidence-building steps we've already proposed to the Soviet Union. 
We must remember that the nonaligned movement was founded to counter the development of blocs and to promote detente between them. Its founders spoke of the right of smaller countries not to become involved in others' disagreements. Since then, membership in the nonaligned movement has grown dramatically, but not all the new members have shared the founders' commitment of genuine nonalignment. Indeed, client governments of the Soviet Union, who have long since lost their independence, have flocked into the nonaligned movement, and, once inside, have worked against its true purpose. Pseudo nonalignment is no better than pseudo arms control. 
The United States rejects as false and misleading the view of the world as divided between the empires of the East and West. We reject it on factual grounds. The United States does not head any bloc of subservient nations, nor do we desire to. What is called the West is a free alliance of governments, most of whom are democratic and all of whom greatly value their independence. What is called the East is an empire directed from the center which is Moscow. 
The United States, today as in the past, is a champion of freedom and self-determination for all people. We welcome diversity; we support the right of all nations to define and pursue their national goals. We respect their decisions and their sovereignty, asking only that they respect the decisions and sovereignty of others. Just look at the world over the last 30 years and then decide for yourself whether the United States or the Soviet Union has pursued an expansionist policy



Exchange With Reporters in New York City on Arms Control and Reduction Negotiations 
September 26, 1983

The President. Well, not purposely



Interview With Members of the Editorial Board of the New York Post in New York City 
September 26, 1983

The President. Well, you can always hope. What I said today I've thought for some time the things that needed saying, both with regard to the United Nations and to their approach to these matters. I just feel very deeply that if—and when I remarked about governments starting wars, that if the representatives of the Soviet Union and ourselves sat down at those tables, those negotiating tables, with the conviction in our minds that there must not be a war, then there won't be a war, and there could almost instantly be a reduction in those terrible and dangerous arms, those weapons. I'm certain that the Russian people don't want a war, and I know our people don't. We don't. And I just do—are they willing to come to the table with that idea in mind, instead of an idea as to how they can preserve some margin of superiority for themselves. 
The President. No, because I don't think it's come from the kind of people that normally would give the signals. But it is an indication there of, certainly, recognition on the part of some, as you say, that this was as terrible a deed as we have said it was. And I just think the world is owed an apology plus a statement to the effect that they're going to join the rest of us in cooperating to see that such a thing can never happen again. And that could be aided and abetted also if they would recognize some responsibility in compensation for the families of the victims. 
The President. I wouldn't hazard a guess on that. But I do say that there is evidence that is a little different than what we usually expect, because usually the official reply comes out with unanimous support over there, and that's it, and that's the story everyone tells. So, this has been a little different, that there have been voices that have begun now. They weren't heard for quite a while. 
In fact, there was such a difference in the stories that it just further added to the evidence of how deliberate and despicable this act was. Most people are tending to forget that their first statement was that they just didn't know anything about it. It just disappeared from their radar. And then when the evidence was presented that it had been shot down and that they were responsible for that, suddenly they come up with a new story about spy plane and so forth. No one's mentioned this yet, but isn't that a pretty hard—the idea of error—a pretty hard thing to believe, when that plane is one on a regular schedule, that at least every week is flying that same route and at the same time of day?
The President. Ah, but we reserve the right to place in other areas— 
The President.—to counter what other threats might be involved in their disposition in other areas of their missiles. 
The President. Maybe that was a restatement of something that was always in our mind. The original concept of what was going in NATO in INF was going to be a mix of Pershings and cruise missiles. And at one time, there was a Russian voice raised that, well, they might listen to cruise missiles but not Pershings at all. Well, this in a way today was a restatement that, no, there will still be a mix, but we are willing that if they agree to reductions, that means that our original figure must be reduced. That reduction will be in both Pershings and cruise missiles. 
But as I said in the remarks, I'd like to see it on the zero-zero basis. We know that can't be. Well, now we want—any reduction that can be achieved is going to be better than what threatens us now and threatens our allies in Europe. And so, that's what we're going to continue to strive for, is to the lowest possible point that they will come, and we will meet them on an equal and a verifiable basis. 
The President. Well, no, I've noticed that many times they on many votes have been able to marshal a majority of votes their way and not on ours. What I was trying to point out was again the—something happens to the whole concept of the U.N. if we find the U.N., like the world, beginning to divide up into blocs. The ideal was supposed to be that every nation would be there as an individual and seeking the same thing, the things that are called for in the charter of the U.N. And there has been evidence of the other, of kind of taking sides or bloc voting, and I was just trying to call their attention back to the original purpose. 



Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of the United Kingdom Following Their Meetings 
September 29, 1983

We reaffirm today ourresolve to maintain a strong Western defense to protect freedom and maintain peace. We'll carry out ourcommitments to the alliance, moving forward in the modernization of NATO's conventional and nuclear deterrent. At the same time, I have pledged America's best efforts to reach acceptable agreements on arms reduction with the Soviet Union. 
The Prime Minister informed me of what her government is doing to prepare for the scheduled deployment of cruise missiles should we fail to reach an agreement with the Soviets. I expressed the thanks of the American people to the Prime Minister for Britain's strong and unequivocal support on this vital issue.



Remarks on Greeting Members of the Washington Capitals and United States Olympic Hockey Teams 
September 29, 1983

Now, a couple of members of the '84 Olympic team also played in the 1980 Lake Placid games. Before the big game with the Soviet team, the coach told the players, "You were born for this moment. This is your moment." And I don't think we'll ever forget the picture of those young Americans, not favored to win by a long shot, but win they did.


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Karl Carstens of the Federal Republic of Germany 
October 4, 1983

We decided in December 1979 that if no agreement with the Soviet Union could be reached, maintaining a balance of force in Europe would require the modernization of NATO's deterrent forces. So far, the Soviet Union has not been willing to negotiate a fair and verifiable arms reduction agreement with us. Let there be no mistake, an agreement will be far better for all concerned. We seek the elimination of these weapons, and we will continue our unflagging efforts to reach an acceptable agreement. But if the Soviet intransigence continues, we must begin deployment and ensure NATO's deterrent


Remarks to Reporters Announcing New United States Initiatives in the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks 
October 4, 1983

Ladies and gentlemen, later today Ambassador Ed Rowny and the other members of the START delegation will depart for Geneva for the opening of the fifth round of the strategic arms reduction talks. They'll carry with them a new set of instructions. From the first day of these negotiations our highest goal has been to achieve a stable balance at reduced levels of nuclear arsenals. We want to reduce the weapons of war, pure and simple. 
All our efforts in both the START and the INF negotiations continue to be guided by that objective. Just this morning, I repeated this commitment to President Carstens of the Federal Republic of Germany. As I pledged to the United Nations, the United States will accept any equitable, verifiable agreement that stabilizes forces at lower levels than currently exist. We want significant reductions, and that pledge stands. 
In the last round of negotiations we proposed a number of new initiatives which where in harmony with the recommendations of the Presidential Commission on Strategic Forces and which provided additional flexibility to our negotiations. Those initiatives supported our basic goals, and they also responded to a number of Soviet concerns. 
I deeply regret that the Soviet Union has yet to give any significant response. Throughout the negotiating process it's the United States who's had to push, pull, probe, and prod in an effort to achieve any progress. The heartfelt desire shared by people everywhere for an historic agreement dramatically reducing nuclear weapons could and indeed will be achieved, provided one condition changes: The Soviet Government must start negotiating in good faith. 
Now, let me emphasize that the United States has gone the extra mile. We've removed the dividing line between the two phases of our original proposal; everything is on the table. We're still most concerned about limits on the fast-flying, most dangerous systems, but we're also prepared to negotiate limits on bomber and air-launch cruise missile limits below SALT II levels. We've shown great flexibility in dealing with the destructive capability of ballistic missiles, including their throw-weight. We've also relaxed our limits on the number of ballistic missiles. 
We've gone a very long way to address Soviet concerns, but the Soviets have yet to take their first meaningful step to address ours. Particularly in the INF talks, but also in START, they've been stonewalling our proposals. When we proposed confidence-building measures that could be agreed to right now, they said wait. Apparently they believe that time is on their side, that they can exploit one democracy against another, and that their uncompromising attitude and delay will ultimately win out. 
Well, we'll prove them wrong. The diversity of our democracies is a source of strength, not weakness. From free discussion among free people comes unity and commitment. The sooner this is understood, the sooner we'll reach an agreement in the interests of both sides. We'll continue to press Moscow for an equitable, fair, and verifiable agreement. 
When the START negotiations resume tomorrow, the United States delegation will again have sustained flexibility. Within the framework of the basic principles that have guided us throughout these negotiations, I am directing Ambassador Rowny to offer the following new initiatives. We're incorporating into START a series of build-down proposals. The United States will introduce a proposal for a mutual, guaranteed builddown, designed to encourage stabilizing systems. The proposal will include specific provisions for building down ballistic warheads and, concurrently, for addressing a parallel build-down on bombers. 
To discuss these major new initiatives, we will also propose the establishment of a U.S.-Soviet build-down working group in the Geneva talks. On another front, and in our effort, again, to be absolutely as flexible as possible, we will be willing to explore ways to further limit the size and capability of air-launch cruise missile forces in exchange for reciprocal Soviet flexibility on items of concern to us. 
We seek limits on the destructive capability of missiles and recognize that the Soviet Union would seek limits on bombers in return. There will have to be tradeoffs, and the United States is prepared to make them, so long as they result in a more stable balance of forces. 
The Soviet Union should not doubt the bipartisan support for our efforts. During our review process I looked for ways to broaden America's bipartisan approach to our overall arms control effort. We've consulted with many Members of the Congress and again with the Commission headed by Brent Scowcroft. Their counsel has been invaluable, and I want to thank them for their tireless efforts and helpful advice. 
It's fitting today to repeat what I said last week. The door to an agreement is open. All the world is waiting for the Soviet Union to walk through. Should the Soviet leadership decide to join us now in our good faith effort, the fifth round of these negotiations will be the one in which, finally, a breakthrough was made, and finally the world began to breathe a bit easier.



Remarks at the Biennial Convention of the National Federation of Republican Women in Louisville, Kentucky 
October 7, 1983

Economic growth is making life better for everyone, and that's the Republican blueprint for the future. The Republican message is dream the big dreams. With freedom and opportunity, there's no limit to what we can accomplish as individuals and as a nation. But let us also remember we cannot prosper unless we are secure, and we cannot be secure unless we're free. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, their chemical poisoning of innocent civilians, their brutal occupation and subversion of one country after another, and their recent attack against 269 innocent civilians aboard KAL flight 007 are all important reminders: We live in a dangerous world, with cruel people who reject our ideals and who disregard individual rights and the value of human life
Now, what was their other idea for reducing the deficit? Oh, yes, cut military spending and, as a few urge, cut it to the bone. After their proposed tax increase the deficit, according to their estimate, would still be around $150 billion. Now remember we have already reduced our planned defense increase by $66 billion. We did that ourselves. Forget that defense spending as a share of the Federal budget is nearly 40 percent less today than it was under John F. Kennedy 20 years ago. Forget that the Russians have been out-investing us in defense by about 2 to 1. We have a deficit left of about $150 billion, which our opponents say can be eliminated by reduced defense spending. So, let's start by eliminating—for an entire year—spending on the Pershing missile, the B-1 bomber, the MX missile, the cruise missile, the Trident submarine and its missiles, the M-1 tank, and then cancel the orders for all the ammunition for all our weapons, including even the bullets for our soldiers' rifles. And that will reduce the deficit of $150 billion by $13.2 billion in 1984



Remarks at a Dinner Marking the loth Anniversary of the Heritage Foundation 
October 8, 1983

I think the picture on the foreign front is very much the same. You can all remember the days of national malaise and international humiliation. Everywhere in the world freedom was in retreat, and America's prestige and influence were at low ebb. In Afghanistan the liberty of a proud people was crushed by brutal Soviet aggression. In Central America and Africa Soviet-backed attempts to install Marxist dictatorships were successfully underway. In Iran international law and common decency were mocked, as 50 American citizens were held hostage. And in international forums the United States was routinely held up to abuse and ridicule by outlaw regimes and police state dictatorships. 
Verifiable and equitable arms control agreements were nowhere in sight, and our own military might had sharply declined. Even friendly governments were toning down their pro-American rhetoric, abandoning their anti-Soviet declarations, withdrawing support for our diplomatic initiatives, and beginning to be influenced by Soviet diplomatic and commercial programs they had previously dismissed outright. 
Third, we have significantly slowed the transfer of valuable free world technology to the Soviet Union. 
Finally, our new willingness to speak out forthrightly about communism has been a critically effective foreign policy step. We're making clear that the free world, far from plunging into irreversible decline, retains the moral energy and spiritual stamina to tell the truth about the Soviets, to state clearly the real issues now before the world. That issue is not, as our adversaries would have us believe, the choice between peace and war, between being dead or Red, but, rather, the choice between freedom and servitude, human dignity and state oppression. 
In our relations with the Soviet Union, we're engaged in a comprehensive agenda of major arms control negotiations. And for the first time, the Soviets are now talking about more than nuclear arms ceilings; they're talking about nuclear arms reductions. And tomorrow I will be meeting with Ambassador Ed Rowny to give him the new instructions he will carry back to the START talks in Geneva on Wednesday. In fact, let me take this a step further and explain why it's our willingness to be candid about the Soviet Union, about its nature and expansionist policies. It improves the chances of success in the arms control area. 
History shows us what works and doesn't work. Unilateral restraint and good will does not provide similar reactions from the Soviet Union, and it doesn't produce genuine arms control. But history does teach that when the United States has the resolve to remain strong and united, when we stand up for what we believe in, and when we speak out forthrightly about the world as it is, then positive results can be achieved. Weakness does not offer the chance for success; strength does. And that strength is based on military capability, strong alliances, a willingness to speak the truth and to state our hope that someday all peoples of the world will enjoy the right to self-government and personal freedom. 
You can remember one administration that tried to minimize the differences between the Soviets and the democracies. They lectured us on our "inordinate fear of communism." Under that administration arms control efforts not only failed, but the hope of improved East-West relations ended in Soviet expansionism on three continents, the invasion of Afghanistan, and an actual discussion by an American President before a joint session of Congress about the use of military force against any attempt to seize control of the Persian Gulf. 
We must never be inhibited by those who say telling the truth about the Soviet empire is an act of belligerence on our part. To the contrary, we must continue to remind the world that self-delusion in the face of unpleasant facts is folly, that whatever the imperfections of the democratic nations, the struggle now going on in the world is essentially the struggle between freedom and totalitarianism, between what is right and what is wrong. This is not a simplistic or unsophisticated observation. Rather, it's the beginning of wisdom about the world we live in, the perils we face, and the great opportunity we have in the years ahead to broaden the frontiers of freedom and to build a durable, meaningful peace. 
Let us never underestimate the power of truth. Not long ago, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn reminded us that righteousness, not just revolutionary violence, has such power. Indeed, that's why I believe the struggle in the world will never be decided by arms, but by a test of wills—a test of Western faith and resolve. 
And this brings me to a second point: The goal of the free world must no longer be stated in the negative, that is, resistance to Soviet expansionism. The goal of the free world must instead be stated in the affirmative. We must go on the offensive with a forward strategy for freedom. As I told the British Parliament in June of 1982, we must foster the hope of liberty throughout the world and work for the day when the peoples of every land can enjoy the blessings of liberty and the right to self-government


Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Lebanon 
October 8, 1983

He went on to say, "I've been keeping up with what's happening in Central America, and I have firsthand knowledge of what is happening in the Middle East. In the case of Central America, the general American consensus is to stay out, that we're getting into another Vietnam. Whenever American military forces go abroad, the average American believes that we should keep to ourselves and mind our own business. I'm not an advocate of war," he says, "as I've seen the ravages of war here in Lebanon. War is a very terrible thing. Yet when diplomatic methods fail, we must be prepared to defend and, if necessary, to die for what we believe in, for the American way of life. I do not enjoy being here in Beirut. My fellow marines and I miss the simple yet wonderful aspects of life back home that so many take for granted. Yet, we realize we'll be going home in a few months. But the people of, say, El Salvador or Lebanon are home. For them, there is no escape. It is our duty as Americans to stop the cancerous spread of Soviet influence wherever it may be, because someday we or some future generation will wake up and find the U.S.A. to be the only free state left, with communism upon our doorstep. And then it will be too late." 
Can the United States or the free world stand by and see the Middle East incorporated into the Soviet bloc? What of Western Europe and Japan's dependence on Middle East oil for the energy to fuel their industry? Do we remember the oil embargo and the lines at our own gas stations? And didn't we assume a moral obligation to the continued existence of Israel as a nation back in 1948? I've never heard anyone in this country ever suggest that we should abandon that obligation. 
Over the course of several months, Lebanon and Israel negotiated a friendly agreement for security of the border between the two. We stand by this as a good agreement. But Syria, which had earlier agreed to withdraw if Israel did, changed its mind, and today has some 5,000 Soviet advisers and technicians and a massive amount of new Soviet equipment in its country, including a new generation of surface-to-surface missiles—the SS-21. We have to wonder aloud about Syrian protestations of their peaceful intentions



Toasts of the President and Ambassador Rinaldo Petrignani at the Italian Embassy Luncheon Commemorating Columbus Day 
October 12, 1983

Within the NATO alliance, Italy is shouldering increasing responsibility through its commitment to deploy new intermediate-range missiles in Sicily if negotiations with the Soviets do not succeed in banning this category of weapons. In Lebanon, Italian troops have joined American and other forces in the difficult and dangerous task of trying to keep the peace. As constructive Italian involvement in world affairs has grown, so has our admiration and respect for your great nation


Remarks on Signing the World Food Day Proclamation 
October 14, 1983

Soviet efforts in the area of humanitarian relief are virtually nonexistent. I challenge the Kremlin to explain why it refuses to provide anything but weapons of destruction to the underdeveloped world. One explanation, of course, is that the Soviet system is incapable of producing enough food for its own population, much less enough to help others in need. What this points to is the undeniable relationship between free enterprise and material abundance, between freedom and caring. 
Today, wheat grown in the Midwest is eaten as pasta in Italy. Our soybeans make soy sauce used in the Orient. Our cottonseed is pressed into oil and shipped to Venezuela, and our grain is consumed in the Soviet Union



Remarks Announcing the Appointment of Robert C. McFarlane as Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs 
October 17, 1983

The President. I don't exactly take a Soviet general's word as being authoritative on anything



Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Station Managers of Ethnically Oriented Publications and Radio Stations 
October 18, 1983

In the area of nuclear weapons, we're working with our European allies to reestablish a stable balance in Europe, which was destroyed by the massive Soviet buildup in the last 10 years. We have made clear, however, that no new weapons need be deployed. We have been, and continue to be, serious in our efforts to reach arms reductions agreements with the Soviets, especially in the area of intermediate-range missiles. 
Let me emphasize today—and I would urge the young people in Europe to reflect on this—it is not the United States and NATO which threaten peace. We have no intermediate, long-range missiles in Europe. And we're willing to forgo them entirely. It's the Soviet Union which has over 1,300 intermediate-range nuclear warheads threatening the countries of Europe, Asia, and elsewhere. And they continue to deploy SS-20 missiles at a rate of one a week—each missile containing three warheads. Now, these are actions of intimidation, pure and simple. 
We stand ready to make any arrangement with the Soviets which will be verifiable and fair to all sides. This includes eliminating an entire class of nuclear weapons, or, if they won't go that far, at least a portion-and the more the better. But we can notnegotiate forever with ourselves. If Soviet intransigence continues, we will move forward to reestablish the balance and ensure NATO's deterrent ability
I think that it underlies all of our relations with the Soviet Union. And so, I applauded when he said that in Vienna

The President. I have to say that I don't believe that breaking off diplomatic relations, even with the Soviet Union in our anger with them over this terrible deed with the Korean airliner.— 
We haven't seen that as providing an advantage yet. There are some times when we think that it is very valuable to have eyes and ears on the scene of some of these places. This does not mean that we are not doing everything we can to bring about a change in that situation and get the Soviet Union out of there and restore freedom to the Afghanistan people and let those millions of refugees come home. But we don't believe that creating a wall of silence between us would be beneficial right now


The President's News Conference
October 19, 1983

The President. Well, the answer to the first part of the question is that I know the Syrians are dragging their feet, but there have been other indications as to the reason for that. Syria, for many years, has talked about a thing called Greater Syria, in which they've believed that much of Jordan and much of Lebanon truly should belong to them. And I think that they have that kind of an interest in this, and aided and abetted by about 7,000 Soviet advisers and technicians and some pretty sophisticated Soviet weaponry, I think that they are contributing to the disorder and the trouble

The President. I think the Soviets are going to negotiate seriously. There is a great propaganda effort going on on their part now, because their target is—they've been encouraged by some of the demonstrations that they've helped organize throughout the world. They think maybe they could persuade our allies to turn back and not ask us for the deployment of the intermediate-range weapons. Well, we're going to deploy, and deploy on schedule. And once they see we're going to do that, and now that they know that we're determined to build our strength and not unilaterally disarm, as we so foolishly have done over recent years, I think they're going to see that the best thing for them is to negotiate with us and in good faith. 
And they may do some things, they may try, as has been rumored, walk out and things of that kind. But we'll just wait at the table, and I think they'll come back. 
The President. Well, I hope very much that we will. We've been at this. I realize the history of negotiations in the past has been long drawn out. But if you will look at some of the negotiations in the past, maybe it was long drawn out because the longer the Soviets sat there, the more we unilaterally disarmed. And they found that just by waiting they could get things that they wanted. Well, we're not doing that. We're arming


Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy Following Their Meetings 
October 20, 1983

Italy is playing a crucial role in the NATO effort to correct the imbalance in nuclear forces in Europe. In our discussion today Prime Minister Craxi and I reviewed the INF negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union and reaffirmed our goal—an equitable and verifiable agreement. If Soviet intransigence continues, we're committed to NATO deployment of U.S. missiles. We remain hopeful that an understanding will be reached, and we'll continue negotiations even after initial deployments. Indeed, for 2 years the United States has negotiated in good faith while the Soviets have continued to deploy theater nuclear weapons


Radio Address to the Nation on Arms Control and Reduction 
October 22, 1983

The trouble is, the obstacle to that agreement we want so dearly is not Washington, and it never has been; it's Moscow. And that's been the case in all our current arms reduction negotiations with the Soviet Union. 
But today I'd like to focus on the longer range INF missile negotiations now underway in Geneva. Some have asked, "If we do want an agreement, why are we, the United States, planning to base new missiles in Europe?" Well, the question reflects some basic misunderstandings. It's been the Soviet Union who's been deploying such forces for a number of years, while the West watched and worried. 
In 1977 the Soviets had in place 600 warheads on their longer range INF missiles. More significantly, they began adding the SS-20, a new, highly accurate mobile missile with three warheads, which could reach in minutes every city in Europe and many cities in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia. NATO had no comparable weapons. 
In October 1979 Soviet leader Brezhnev announced a balance now exists. The Soviet Union—800 warheads; NATO—zero. Some balance. It was only at this point at the end of 1979 that the NATO alliance, not the United States alone, decided the Soviets' large and growing advantage in both nuclear and conventional forces would threaten our safety. So, the alliance made what was called the "dual-track decision." We would redress the imbalance by deploying comparable weapons, while seeking an agreement at the negotiating table that would eliminate the need for deployment. 
Nothing more dramatically illustrates our sincere desire for peace than our willingness not to deploy if the Soviets would stop threatening Europe with their missiles. How did the Soviets respond? By adding one new missile every week. They now have 1,300 warheads or more, and that number is growing. NATO still has zero. 
All along we've been negotiating in good faith. We asked the Soviets to consider the total elimination of these missiles. It took them less than 24 hours to answer, "Nyet." So we proposed an interim solution, some equal but lower number, and the lower the better. With knee-jerk speed, the same answer came back again, "Nyet." And it's remained the same for all our new proposals, because the Soviets insist on a monopoly of longer range INF missiles. They offer what can only be called "a half-zero option," zero for us, hundreds of warheads for them. As I told the members of the United Nations, that's where things stand today. We will continue our efforts to make the Soviets heed the will of the world, stop stonewalling, and start negotiating in good faith. 
But that wish should not become father to the thought. We must look at Soviet words and deeds with a clear head and ask some long overdue questions. Why does a regime which says it seeks peace repeatedly reject equitable proposals that would preserve peace? What are we to think of Soviet threats against NATO countries: warning Turkey it could become "a nuclear cemetery;" telling Scandinavian countries they are "a bridgehead for aggression;" and advising West Germany if new missiles are deployed, the military threat to it will grow manifold? 
These are not words of a peacemaker but of a nation bent on intimidation. It is inconceivable that any Western leader would make such crude and provocative threats. 
Finally, what is the credibility of a regime which exploits peace demonstrations in the West, but brutally puts down any demonstration for reduced weaponry in its own country? As President Mitterrand of France recently observed, "Pacifism is in the West, and Euro-missiles are in the East. I consider that an unequal relationship." 
My fellow Americans, the values of Western civilization and the beliefs that bind free people together are being tested. The Soviets are engaged' in a campaign to intimidate the West, but it will not work. At home, bipartisan support in the Congress remains strong. And the unity of our NATO alliance will not break. Just this week, Prime Minister Craxi of Italy visited the White House and assured me of Italy's continued staunch support. Earlier this year, at the Williamsburg summit, the leaders of the industrialized nations agreed the policy is correct, fair, and should go forward. The spirit of Williamsburg is as strong as ever. 
There is simply no sensible alternative to the parallel goal of deterrence and arms reduction. We will remain at the negotiating table just as long as it takes to reach a breakthrough. But the Soviets must understand: NATO's mission is to defend Europe and preserve peace, which it has done for 34 years. And NATO will continue to meet its responsibilities. Our countries will remain united, strong, and we will protect the safety of our people.


Address to the Nation on Events in Lebanon and Grenada 
October 27, 1983

Syria, which makes no secret of its claim that Lebanon should be a part of a Greater Syria, was occupying a large part of Lebanon. Today, Syria has become a home for 7,000 Soviet advisers and technicians who man a massive amount of Soviet weaponry, including SS-21 ground-to-ground missiles capable of reaching vital areas of Israel

If terrorism and intimidation succeed, it'll be a devastating blow to the peace process and to Israel's search for genuine security. It won't just be Lebanon sentenced to a future of chaos. Can the United States, or the free world, for that matter, stand by and see the Middle East incorporated into the Soviet bloc? What of Western Europe and Japan's dependence on Middle East oil for the energy to fuel their industries? The Middle East is, as I've said, vital to our national security and economic well-being.

In 1979 trouble came to Grenada. Maurice Bishop, a protege of Fidel Castro, staged a military coup and overthrew the government which had been elected under the constitution left to the people by the British. He sought the help of Cuba in building an airport, which he claimed was for tourist trade, but which looked suspiciously suitable for military aircraft, including Soviet-built long-range bombers

Two hours ago we released the first photos from Grenada. They included pictures of a warehouse of military equipment-one of three we've uncovered so far. This warehouse contained weapons and ammunition stacked almost to the ceiling, enough to supply thousands of terrorists. Grenada, we were told, was a friendly island paradise for tourism. Well, it wasn't. It was a Soviet-Cuban colony, being readied as a major military bastion to export terror and undermine democracy. We got there just in time. 
The events in Lebanon and Grenada, though oceans apart, are closely related. Not only has Moscow assisted and encouraged the violence in both countries, but it provides direct support through a network of surrogates and terrorists. It is no coincidence that when the thugs tried to wrest control over Grenada, there were 30 Soviet advisers and hundreds of Cuban military and paramilitary forces on the island. At the moment of our landing, we communicated with the Governments of Cuba and the Soviet Union and told them we would offer shelter and security to their people on Grenada. Regrettably, Castro ordered his men to fight to the death, and some did. The others will be sent to their homelands

Radio Address to the Nation on Nuclear Weapons 
October 29, 1983

As you know, we're negotiating with the Soviets in Geneva on the longer range missiles. The current imbalance on those systems is over 350 to 0 in their favor. But with regard to the shorter range missiles, the tactical missiles, I think you'll be very pleased with today's news. But first, a little background. 
The nuclear forces in Europe are fundamental to our overall strategy of deterrence and to protecting our allies and ourselves. The weapons strengthen NATO and protect the peace because they show that the alliance is committed to sharing the risks and the benefits of mutual defense. Just by being there, these weapons deter others from aggression and, thereby, serve the cause of peace. Unfortunately, we must keep them there until we can convince the Soviets and others that the best thing would be a world in which there is no further need for nuclear weapons at all.
This step, taken by the alliance as a whole, stands in stark contrast to the actions of the Soviet Union. The Soviet leaders have so far refused to negotiate in good faith at the Geneva talks. Since our 1979 decision to reduce nuclear forces, the Soviet Union has added over 600 SS-20 warheads to their arsenal. Coupled with this, they offer threats and the acceleration of previous plans, which they now call countermeasures, if NATO carries through with its deployment plan intended to restore the balance. 
The comparison of Soviet actions with NATO's reductions and restraint clearly illustrates once again that the so-called arms race has only one participant—the Soviet Union. 
On Thursday NATO took a dramatic and far-reaching decision, a decision that puts us a giant step along the path toward increased stability in Europe and around the world. As we reduce our nuclear warheads in Europe and, of equal importance, take the necessaryactions to maintain the effectiveness of the resulting force, we will continue in the future what we've accomplished so well in the past—to deter Soviet aggression. We seek peace and we seek security, and the NATO decision serves both. 
Now, let me bring you up to date on the negotiations in Geneva. Progress toward an equitable, verifiable agreement on the reduction of intermediate-range nuclear missiles has been slow to come. Most recently, I proposed three initiatives which go a long way toward meeting important concerns expressed by the Soviet Union. By our actions on the talks we have ensured that all of the elements of a mutually advantageous agreement are on the table. The Soviet Union has now advanced some additional proposals of its own. We'll study these proposals, and we'll address them in the talks in Geneva. 
Unfortunately, the Soviet proposals permit them to retain SS-20 missiles while notallowing NATO to deploy its own. The proposals are also coupled with an explicit threat to break off the Geneva talks. I hope that the Soviet Union is truly interested in achieving an agreement. The test will be whether the Soviets, having advanced their latest proposals, decide finally to negotiate seriously in Geneva.



Remarks Announcing the Appointment of Donald Rumsfeld as the President's Personal Representative in the Middle East 
November 3, 1983

The operation was not without cost. Those who were killed, wounded, or injured in this operation, I believe, are heroes of freedom. They not only rescued our own citizens, but they saved the people of Grenada from repression and laid aside a potential threat to all the people of the Caribbean. After viewing the massive horde of Soviet weapons found on that island, who knows what evil the liberation of Grenada achieved for us, or averted in the years ahead

The President. Oh for heaven sakes. Anyone who would link Afghanistan to this operation—and incidentally, I know your frequent use of the word "invasion"—this was a rescue mission. But in Afghanistan, if you will recall, when the Soviets installed their choice of head of state for Afghanistan and in the process in changing the forces there, an American Ambassador was murdered in Afghanistan. And then, against all the opposition of the Afghanistan people, they have used every vicious form of warfare, including chemical warfare, the killing of women and children—that has caused even some of their own men to desert because they will not carry out the orders to kill women and children. And they're still there after a long period of time, longer than I've been in this office. As compared to what we did in answer, actually, to an appeal that first came from the Governor General of the island, who was in house arrest, to his fellow states there in the Caribbean—or appealing for rescue, and we helped in the rescue


Remarks at a White House Ceremony for Medical Students and United States Military Personnel From Grenada 
November 7, 1983

Unbelievably, the other day a reporter asked me what was the difference between our invading Grenada and the Soviets invading Afghanistan? And the question sort of touched my temperature control. [Laughter] I answered. And among the things I said was that there was no comparison between the savage invasion of Afghanistan with its slaughter of innocent men, women, and children—civilians—and the heroic rescue mission of our young Americans. Our troops are already leaving Grenada, but don't hold your breath waiting for the Soviets to leave Afghanistan


Interview With Nobutaka Shikanai of Fuji Television of Japan on the President's Trip to Japan 
November 7, 1983

What we need is to be able to deter others who are destabilizing—the forces, such as from the Soviet Union with their attempts at expansionism. What we need is to have the military strength to deter aggression at the same time that we try to convince the aggressors that they, too, will be better off in a peaceful world

With the Soviet Union, we have to recognize there that there is where we must have the strength to deter aggression. They seem bent on worldwide expansionism. They have 50 divisions on the Chinese border. They have about 120 SS-20 nuclear missiles on that border. They have the largest fleet, the largest of their fleets is in the Pacific, in the area of both Japan and the People's Republic of China. So, there we must have the patience to convince them that peace would be to their advantage, also. And in the meantime, the only way to protect the peace is to have the strength to deter


Remarks on Departure for Japan and the Republic of Korea 
November 8, 1983

The Soviet shooting down of KAL 007, their continued military buildup in Asia, including the development of the SS-20 missiles there, are grim reminders to us that we live in a dangerous world. I will reaffirm Americascommitment [orginally America’s; replaced for Yoshikoder] to remain a reliable partner for peace and stability in the region and in the world


Remarks at Elmendorf Air Force Base, Alaska, En Route to Japan and the Republic of Korea 
November 8, 1983

Peace is essential if we're to realize our economic potential. And to maintain peace we must maintain a strong defense. Alaska has much of which to be proud on this account— [applause] —you have much to be proud of in this account as well. You are a first line of defense. This is becoming evermore apparent in the wake of the Soviets' brutal downing of a civilian airliner.


Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan Following Their Meetings in Tokyo 
November 10, 1983

During our discussions on arms control, I assured Prime Minister Nakasone that we seek global reductions in the Soviet's intermediate-range SS-20's to the lowest level possible. The United States will take no action in the intermediate nuclear forces negotiations that adversely affects the security of Asia. We agreed on the urgency of achieving consensus on comprehensive international safeguards to prevent the spread of nuclear weaponry


Address Before the Japanese Diet in Tokyo 
November 11, 1983

In the strategic arms reduction talks, American negotiators continue to press the Soviet Union for any formula that will achieve these objectives. In the longer range INF talks, we are pursuing the same course, even offering to eliminate an entire category of weapons. I'm very conscious of our negotiating responsibility on issues that concern the safety and well-being of the Japanese people. And let me make one thing very plain. We must not and we will notaccept any agreement that transfers the threat of longer range nuclear missiles from Europe to Asia.

To all those who lack faith in the human spirit, I have just three words of advice: Come to Japan. Come to a country whose economic production will soon surpass the Soviet Union's, making Japan's economy the second largest in the entire world. Come to learn from a culture that instills in its people a strong spirit of cooperation, discipline, and striving for excellence; and yes, learn from government policies which helped create this economic miracle—not so much by central planning, as by stimulating competition, encouraging initiative, and rewarding savings and risk-taking


Interview With Representatives of NHK Television in Tokyo, Japan 
November 11, 1983

But with regard to the Soviet Union—and you mentioned my hard line. And that is—I know I'm described that way a great deal. [Laughter] What is being called a hard line, I think, is realism. I had some experience with Communists—not of the Soviet kind, but domestic, in our own country, some years ago when I was president of a labor union there. 
And I feel that we have to be realistic with the Soviet Union. It is not good for us, as some in the past have, to think, well, they're just like us and surely we can appeal to, say, their kindliness or their better nature. No. I think they're very materialistic. They're very realistic. They have some aggressive and expansionist aims in the world. And I believe that, yes, you can negotiate with them; yes, you can talk to them. But it must be on the basis of recognizing them as the way they are and then presenting the proposals in such a way that they can see that it is to their advantage to be less hostile in the world and to try and get along with the rest of the nations of the world. And if this is hard-line, then I'm hard-line. 
But it is important because of, also, your opening remarks with reference to the great nuclear forces in the world. We are going to stay at that negotiating table. We won't walkaway from it. We're going to stay there trying, not as we have in the past to set some limits or ceilings on how many more missiles would be built, how much more growth they could take in those weapons, we want a reduction in the numbers. But really and practically, when we start down that road, and if we can get cooperation from them in reducing them, we should then continue down that road to their total elimination. 
Many years ago, after he became President, Dwight Eisenhower, as President, wrote a letter to a noted publisher in our country. And he said in that letter that we had to face the fact that weapons were being developed in which we could no longer see a war that would end in victory or defeat as we had always known it. But the weapons were such that it would end in the destruction of human kind. And, as he said, when we reach that moment, then let us have the intelligence to sit down at a table and negotiate our problems before we destroy the world. 
I see it also in another way that he didn't mention. Once upon a time, we had rules of warfare. War is an ugly thing, but we had rules in which we made sure that soldiers fought soldiers, but they did not victimize civilians. That was civilized. Today we've lost something of civilization in that the very weapons we're talking about are designed to destroy civilians by the millions. And let us at least get back to where we once were—that if we talk war at all, we talk it in a way in which there could be victory or defeat and in which civilians have some measure of protection.
The President. Yes, and this is part of that realism that I meant. I once did a lot of negotiating across a table as a labor leader on behalf of a union, and I think I know and understand the give and take of negotiations. But for a number of years now, recently, we have sat at the table in meetings with the Soviet leaders who have engaged in the biggest military buildup in the history of mankind. And they sat on their side of the table looking at us and knowing that unilaterally we were disarming without getting anything in return. They didn't have to give up anything. They saw themselves get stronger in relation to all of us as we, ourselves, made ourselves weaker. 
I think realistically to negotiate arms reductions they have to see that there is a choice. Either they join in those arms reductions, or they then have to face the fact that we are going to turn our industrial might to building the strength that would be needed to deter them from ever starting a war. 
Wars don't start because a nation is—they don't start them when they are weak; they start them when they think they're stronger than someone else. And it is very dangerous to let them see that they have a great margin of superiority over the rest of us. There's nothing to prevent them from then becoming aggressive and starting a war. 
Now, if they know that they cannot match us—and when I say us, I mean our allies and Japan and the United States-they cannot match us if we are determined to build up our defenses. So they then face the fact that as we build them up, they might then find themselves weaker than we are. 
It was all summed up in a cartoon in one of our papers. This was before the death of Leonid Brezhnev. Brezhnev was portrayed talking to a Russian general, and he was saying to the general, "I liked the arms race better when we were the only ones in it." [Laughter] 
With the problem of Cuba in the Mediterranean-in the Caribbean, we have to recognize that more than half of all of our shipping of those necessities we must have come through the Caribbean. It wasn't an accident that back in the First World War that the German submarine packs took up their places there. We know that the strategic waterways of the world—the Soviet Union has now built up the greatest navy in the world, and the biggest part of that navy is here in the Pacific, in the vicinity of your own country. But they know, as anyone must know in world strategy, that there are a limited number of choke points, sea passages that are essential to your livelihood and to ours. You can start with the Panama Canal and the Suez Canal, but then the Straits of Gibraltar, but then right here in the passages that lead to your own island, the Malacca and the Makassar Straits. There are a total of no more than 16 in the whole world. And a nation that could dominate those narrow passages and shut them off to our shipping could secure victory without firing a shot at any of us.


Address Before the Korean National Assembly in Seoul 
November 12, 1983

Our world is sadder today, because these ancient and honorable practices could not protect the lives of some recent travelers. Instead of offering assistance to a lost civilian airliner, the Soviet Union attacked. Instead of offering condolences, it issued denials. Instead of offering reassurances, it repeated its threats. Even in the search for our dead, the Soviet Union barred the way. This behavior chilled the entire world. The people of Korea and the United States shared a special grief and anger.


Radio Address to the Nation on the President's Trip to Japan and the Republic of Korea 
November 12, 1983

Economic issues are important, but as I noted, freedom and peace exist in an uneasy climate here. We need to remember that Japan and Korea are key allies. They know what living in the shadow of communism is like. It was a Japanese communications center that tracked the cold, calculating words of that Soviet pilot who gunned down the Korean airliner and 269 innocent victims



Toast at the State Dinner in Seoul, Republic of Korea 
November 12, 1983

Our mutual belief in economic freedom, for example, Mr. President, must not only be defended but spread as far as possible throughout the world. The 66 years that have followed the Russian Revolution and its attempt to turn Communist theory into practice have been marked by tragic failure. Innumerable variations of the Marxist economic system have brought stagnation, waste, and hardship to many countries and many peoples. We must never tire of reminding the world of this. We must never tire of explaining and promoting the free market system and its benefits.


Remarks to American Troops at Camp Liberty Bell, Republic of Korea 
November 15, 1983

Recently, as you know, we sent our forces to the island of Grenada. Some critics compared that operation with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Well, let me just say there's something seriously wrong with anyone who can't see the difference between 100,000 Soviets trying to force a dictatorship down the throats of the Afghan people and America and eight Caribbean democracies joining to stop Cubans and local Communists from doing the same thing in Grenada. 
And let me ask a question of my own. Why are the Soviets being attacked by the people of Afghanistan, while our U.S. and Caribbean forces have been greeted as liberators by the people in Grenada? The answer is: No people in history have ever chosen to be slaves. 
We have held interviews with some of the Soviet soldiers who have deserted in Afghanistan. And a significant thing is, in different areas, without their having a chance to communicate with each other or even knowing about each other, one of the prime reasons they have given us—young Russians, men like yourselves, only from Russia—for deserting is they were ordered to kill women and children. And some of them proved that there is still some hope there among the people if the people can ever get a chance to speak.


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on the Intermediate- Range Nuclear Force Negotiations 
November 23, 1983

The President. No, I still don't believe there's danger of a nuclear conflict as long as we have the deterrent power that we have. I don't think that I'm surprised by what they did this morning, but I am disappointed. And I can't believe that it's going to be permanent. We'll be ready to continue negotiations at any time that they want to come back. 
Let me just point out the two superpowers are the only force that can preserve the peace and maintain peace. And we have, for 2 years, and we were the ones who initiated these discussions about eliminating, if possible, the intermediate-range weapons in Europe at a time when NATO had none. And during these 2 years or so of negotiations and talks, they have continued to add a hundred of their triple-warhead SS-20 missiles to the stock they already had. At the same time, they are proclaiming that we are the aggressors in wanting to accede to NATO's demand and put any missiles at all in Europe, where there are none. 
Now, we, at present, have plans and are going to continue with withdrawing tactical and theater weapons, 1,400 more than we've already withdrawn. So, I think the evidence is very plain as to which country of the two is sincerely and honestly working toward a reduction of armaments. 
The President. Well, they have announced that this is their intention, but I understand that there's also some unhappiness and dissatisfaction on the part of some of the Eastern European countries about their doing that. 
The President. I don't know how soon. I can't put a time on it. I think they'll come back, because I think they must be aware, as much as we are, that there cannot and must not be a nuclear confrontation in the world by the only two nations that truly have the great destructive capability, nuclear capability. So, I have to believe they'll come back. And I can tell you that we're not going to sit here with false pride. We will do everything that we can to bring them back. 
The President. Continuing to persuade them that it's to their advantage as well as anyone else's. 


Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel Following Their Meetings 
November 29, 1983

We have agreed on the need to increase our cooperation in areas where our interests coincide, particularly in the political and military area. And I am pleased to announce that we have agreed to establish a joint political-military group to examine ways in which we can enhance U.S.-Israeli cooperation. This group will give priority attention to the threat to our mutual interest posed by increased Soviet involvement in the Middle East. Among the specific areas to be considered are combined planning, joint exercises, and requirements for prepositioning of U.S. equipment in Israel. 
A main focus of our meetings was the agony of Lebanon and the threats there to our common interests. We examined, together, Soviet activities in the Middle East and found a common concern with the Soviet presence and arms buildup in Syria. We reaffirmed our commonly held goals of a sovereign, independent Lebanon free of all foreign forces, and of security for Israel's northern border


Question-and-Answer Session With High School Students on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
December 2, 1983

The President. Well, it's true that there's difficulty, and there has been in this period and before his illness. When a new man is just taking over and getting his government organized, there's a period in there in which he's not ready to get out and start talking with someone else about international affairs. So, there would be that period again, if there is a change of leadership. 
I will say this, on the other hand, though, that we are in communication at a number of levels with people in the Soviet Union. We're not just incommunicado. We have people that have channels and through the State Department and all, that we're in contact. I have even communicated with personal, handwritten letters, myself. 
And we feel that the two superpowers, in the position we're in in the world today, with all the tensions and with all the possibility for a tragic error, that we can't discontinue our conversation and our meetings with them. But because you don't see an awful lot about this in the public media, it is going on. 
I happen to be a believer in what I've called quiet diplomacy. For example, if you make a demand on the other government and you say, "You've got to do this; we don't like what you're doing," and it's on the front page of the papers and on the TV news, in the world of politics you've put that person in a position where he can hardly give in, because then in the eyes of their own people they would be accepting orders from another government. So on many of the touchiest points, you deal quietly in the background with an individual there. And you say, "Look, we're not going to go out making speeches about this, but this is a problem. And it's a problem that affects our relations with each other. And if you were doing, could see your way to doing this—whatever that particular thing is—believe me, our relations would be much better." And we've been doing this. And I have to tell you, it works
The President. Well, we're aware of those planes that are in those areas. And I'd call to your attention that we have carrier squadrons that are on duty in the Caribbean and over on the Pacific side, off that side of Central America. And we think that we have sufficient force and sufficient warning for our own bases that we can handle that. 
When the Cuban missile crisis came along, the situation was far different. And I don't mean to take anything away from President Kennedy. But at that time the United States had about an 8 to 1 nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union. So when we stood up and looked them in the eye, they blinked


Remarks at the Jewish Community Center of Greater Washington During the Observance of Hanukkah 
December 4, 1983

I think it's wonderful that the American Jewish community is using Hanukkah to assist Jews in the Soviet Union. And how good it is to know that, at this very moment, Jews who have fled oppression are here with us taking their first steps toward becoming American citizens. On behalf of more than 230 million Americans, may I say to you, welcome to your new family. 
We know that the emigration of Jews from the Soviet Union is practically stopped. They're constantly ridiculed, harassed, beaten, and arrested by Soviet authorities. It's no exaggeration to say their entire Jewish population feels it is under siege. Today, Soviet Jews are fighting for their future and their freedom, as the Maccabees once did. But their fight is a peaceful one. Some are struggling to emigrate from the Soviet Union. Many others are trying to assert their rights to practice their religion and preserve their heritage. In their struggle, we must not forsake them. We will not remain silent


Interview With Garry Clifford and Patricia Ryan of People Magazine 
December 6, 1983

And I think that my own reaction to it was, look, if anything, if this can add to what we can say about the fact that there must not be a nuclear war, then maybe the people will understand why we're trying so desperately to get a reduction in those weapons worldwide. And I hope that if we start down the reduction road that the other side will see the common sense in eliminating them totally. Not since 1946 has there been such a suggestion, and that was made by this country. And even then, when we were the only ones, really, with a stock of such weapons, the Soviet Union refused. 
The President. Yes. 
The President. Yes, I would have told him that the only way there could be war is if they start it; we're not going to start a war. 
The President. No. I think that it was high time that we got some realism and got people thinking that for too long we have kind of viewed them as just a mirror image of ourselves, and that maybe we could appeal to their good nature. And we've gone through the experience in a number of years past of saying, well, if we cancel weapons systems, if we unilaterally disarm, maybe they'll see that we're nice people, too, and they'll disarm. Well, they didn't. They just kept on increasing. 
The President. Yes, because you have to look at the impact on what we were just talking about, with Lebanon. There they are with thousands of military advisers and technicians and so forth in Syria, have provided Syria with weapons that are not purely defense weapons—ground-to-ground missiles that can cover virtually every target from Syria in Israel. And they are the ones that seek, whether it's out of paranoia on their part—and, believe me, everyone's an enemy, and so they have to be aggressive-or whether it is the Marxist-Leninist theory, more than a theory—commitment-that was handed them, and that was that they must support uprisings wherever they take place in the world to bring about a one-world Communist state. 
Now, no Russian leader has ever refuted that. As a matter of fact, he hasn't had time yet, but every Russian leader up to Andropov, at some time or other, has publicly restated his commitment to world conquest—world communizing



Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev of Nepal 
December 7, 1983

Your Majesty's moral leadership in condemning the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan is much appreciated here. We should not forget the heroism of the Afghan people in their fight for the freedom and independence of their country


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Strategic Arms Reduction Talks 
December 8, 1983

But I just wanted to say something about this supposed break off of negotiations in START and call to your attention that the Soviet Union—this was a regular adjournment; it was scheduled to take place—and the Soviet Union, in departing, simply said that they were not prepared at this time to set a date for resumption of meetings.


Remarks at the National Forum on Excellence in Education in Indianapolis, Indiana 
December 8, 1983

And sixth and last, we must teach the basics. Too many of our students are allowed to abandon vocational and college prep courses for general ones. So, when they graduate from high school they're prepared for neither work nor higher education. And compared to other industrialized countries, we're slipping far behind in such basic areas as in the sciences and math. In Japan, specialized study in mathematics, biology, and physics starts in sixth grade. In the Soviet Union, students learn the basic concepts of algebra and geometry in elementary school. So, Japan, with a population only about half the size of ours, graduates from college more engineers than we do, while the Soviet Union graduates from college almost five times more engineering specialists than we do


Remarks on Signing the Bill of Rights Day and Human Rights Day and Week Proclamation 
December 9, 1983

As Americans, it's our responsibility to speak out against blatant affronts to human rights. Yes, we must and we will speak out against the incarceration of Soviet dissidents in psychiatric wards, against the barbaric persecution of the members of the Bahai faith in Iran, against the racial injustice of the apartheid system in South Africa, and against the persecution of the Catholic Church and the Solidarity labor movement in Poland. 
We cannot believe in human rights and ignore the activities of death squads in some Central American countries, the persecution of the churches and to the Miskito Indians in Nicaragua, and the resurgence of repression against national and religious groups in the Soviet Union, including Jews, Baptists, Lithuanian Catholics, Central Asian Moslems, and even members of the Russian Orthodox clergy
You know—I should have brought it with me, although maybe some of you have seen it—but I have a little book, about that big, and about that thick, that contains a verse or two, printed in small type in that little thing, from the Bible. It was smuggled out of Russia and was finally delivered to me as an example of what they do just to try and cling to their faith and belief, that when someone has a Bible, they then take just a verse so that everyone can have at least some words—a few words of the Scripture-and in something that can be easily hidden. And that, when we think of our own freedom, makes it very evident. 
I've done something else—I have to interject here, although this is not an occasion for humor. But I've had a kind of a hobby lately of collecting by way of dissidents stories that are told behind some of those iron curtains and those iron walls by the people themselves, showing their own cynicism about the system under which they're forced to live. And one recently that I heard had to do with three dogs that were having a conversation: an American dog, a Polish dog, and a Russian dog. And the American dog was telling them about how, well, he barks and that in our country his master gives him some meat. And the Polish dog says, "What's meat?" [Laughter] And the Russian dog says, "What's bark?"
I note with sadness and concern that one hero not with us today, Dr. Andrei Sakharov, is reported to be seriously ill. This good and courageous man has struggled for years on behalf of human rights, and he's now banished to the city of Gorki—supposedly free; he just can't leave Gorki. It's my hope that in the name of humanity the Soviet authorities will permit this noble individual to live his life in freedom and dignity



Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Lebanon 
December 10, 1983

The Palestinians also had a military, the armed PLO. Trained in terrorist tactics by Soviet-bloc nations and Libya, the PLO joined the civil war and attacked Israeli targets, villages and schools across the border between Lebanon and Israel. 
In 1958 President Eisenhower used a bipartisan congressional resolution to send 8,000 American soldiers and marines to Lebanon. When order was restored, our military came home. But in 1958 there were no occupying foreign armies, and there was no Soviet presence in Syria. Today, there are more than 7,000 Soviet military advisers and technicians.


Interview With Bruce Drake of the New York Daily News 
December 12, 1983

The President. I don't know that there's any sign that they want a confrontation, particularly with us. But there's no question about their interest in the Middle East, and there's no question but that where there is trouble of any kind, they don't mind stirring the pot. 
Now, just take a look at Ethiopia, South Yemen, and you can see that the Soviets have eyed the Middle East. It is a place of strategic importance to, particularly, the Western World—Europe and Japan. Where would they turn to, what would they do if suddenly a force should shut off the energy supply that comes from the Middle East? 
Now, the Soviet Union does not need the Middle East for that purpose. The Soviet Union has the greatest supply of oil reserves in the world. It is the greatest producer of energy. 
Mr. Drake. Well, is there anything that you're expecting as far as what they intend in the region? Do we—you do not expect that the Soviets are trying to shift confrontation to that region? Do you think that they're just filling contractual obligations to an ally? 
The President. Well, I think very much they want to be involved and have a stake in the Middle East. And you can't ignore the things that, as I say, that they've done in Yemen and Ethiopia, there in the horn of Africa. You can't ignore Afghanistan. You can't ignore the divisions that they have at the border of Iran. 
As a matter of fact, the Russian desire to move in that direction toward warm water precedes even the Soviets. 


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
December 14, 1983

The President. Yes, we are trying to stay in communication with them. And I have to believe that they will come back, because it is to their advantage to come back. They stand to gain as much or more than anyone in coming back to those talks. So, we're still determined on the reduction, particularly of nuclear weapons, and I am determined that once you start down that path, we must come to the realization that those weapons should be outlawed worldwide forever. 
The President. Are you trying to ask whether I'm going to be busy in 1984 or not? When the time is right, you don't go by what is a time period that is right for it. When there is an opportunity and evidence that we can achieve something, that there is an agenda that can go on the table in which some gains can be made for both sides, then you have a summit. You don't have one just to say that you've had a summit, because too many people get disappointed


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors of Gannett Newspapers on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
December 14, 1983

In Europe the NATO alliance has held firm, despite months of Soviet bluster. Sooner or later, the Soviets are going to realize that arms reductions are in their best interest. When they do, we'll be at the table waiting for them, ready to go on negotiating from strength and in good faith.


Interview With Marvin Stone and Joseph Fromm of U.S. News & World Report 
December 15, 1983

First, in the year ahead, how do you propose to rebuild a working relationship with the Soviet Union and revive meaningful arms control negotiations? 
The President. We can do it, because those negotiations are as much value to the Soviet Union as they are to anyone else. Even more important. 
I have to point out that, with all this talk about the supposed strain in relations, there is an inference that somehow it is our fault. But we didn't kill Russian citizens by shooting down a civilian airplane. We didn't attempt to conquer an adjacent country to ours. We didn't walk out on negotiations and refuse to give a date for when we would resume. If there is a strain, it has not been caused by us. 
The President. I still think we can continue to deal with them and resolve problems between us. The biggest problem we all face is achieving genuine peace in the world. I don't think they want a confrontation any more than we do. 
We'll be at that negotiating table when the Soviets decide to come back ready to negotiate in good faith. We have never broken off communications. We have at several levels continued to meet with the Soviets—and we are ready. I know, on the other hand, that the absence of Andropov must have had some influence on their side on exactly what could be done. 
I believe that the Soviet Union has more to gain than we, or anyone else, in taking a look at changing the situation and, in effect, them joining the family of nations the way the rest of us have who are concerned with peace.
Now, as for the El Salvador Government: There has been important progress in recent years achieving democratic ideals, practices, and policy. They're beset by Cuban- and Soviet-backed insurgents who don't want that kind of government. They want the old-fashioned idea that we've seen for the last few hundred years—the idea that if you have a revolution, it is only to exchange one set of rules for another set of rulers. For once, we've got a government there that says: "No. This is to be revolution to change that process."

The President. After years and years of unilateral disarming on our side, with this country canceling weapons systems and so forth for domestic political reasons, the Soviets didn't have to give anything up. I think it was all explained in my favorite cartoon. It was the cartoon that portrayed Brezhnev when he was still alive, and it had him talking to a Russian general. Brezhnev said, "I liked the arms race better when we were the only ones in it." 
Now, the Soviets have found out they are facing a belated U.S. modernization program which will assure the effectiveness of our deterrent. I think that is the only reason they came to the table to discuss arms reductions. They have come to realize that we'll do whateverisnecessary to make it evident that hostile moves on their part would result in equal or greater punishment to them. That's the purpose of our military buildup, and it certainly worked in Geneva.


The President's News Conference
December 20, 1983
They're being assailed from the left by the Cuban- and Soviet-backed guerrilla forces. But at the same time they're being sniped at from the rear by—they're called the death squads and the so-called rightists, who, by the same token, don't want democracy. They want to go back to what they've had in this 400-year history. And the El Salvador Government has made great progress in establishing democracy. They're hindered in their fight against the guerrillas by this action behind their backs. But you have to look at punishing that government for trying to be democratic when it is being assailed from radicals from both sides—I think our obligation is to try and help democracy triumph there, and this is why we've offered some help



Interview With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
December 23, 1983

The President. No. 
The President. Well, we're going to keep on with that. And, actually, the Soviets have not said no. They said they wouldn't set a date yet for the resumption of these talks. 
The President. Yes, but since then there have been statements to the fact that they just are not ready and that they're unwilling at this point to set a date. I believe they will be back, and I believe we're further from a confrontation possibility because of the deterrent capability of the United States and our allies at this point. I think there was a far more unstable condition when we had let our own strength deteriorate to the point that there was a window of vulnerability. 
And I would like to call your attention to one thing. There have been 19—prior to this, to our talks—there have been 19 efforts since World War II to engage the Soviet Union in talks about arms reduction. There has never been any progress made in those. The SALT talks, actually, were not arms reductions; they were supposed to be setting a ceiling on how many more weapons would be built. And that has not been ratified, the SALT II treaty. 
But in these negotiations, even though the Soviets were not as forthcoming as we would like to have had them be, they still did make a couple of offers to reduce the number of their weapons. Now, that is the first time they have ever done that in any negotiations, in all these previous 19 attempts. And I think that now that they see that we are determined to maintain our own ability to defend ourselves, and our allies with us are included in that, I think that they have to see that these negotiations are in their interest as well as ours. 
The President. No. I think the things that we have heard. I think that this is, you might say, almost a part of the negotiating process. Their whole principal move over this last year or so has been an effort to stop the deployment of the intermediate-range weapons that were asked for by NATO. And the fact that we're going ahead, this, maybe, could be tied to that as still, you might say, an element of negotiating. But we are going to proceed with the installation of those weapons. 
The President. Well, maybe the scientists know more about science. And from the standpoint of the power of the weapons, yes, they are more powerful; they are more destructive on both sides than they were before. And maybe looking at it from a scientist's viewpoint, that moves up their doomsday clock. But they're not involved in the diplomatic and political end of this as we are. 
The President. Well, I'm wondering. On their doomsday clock, each minute on that clock—is that weeks? Is that months? Is that years? They've never said what it is. But, no, I believe that actually—and I can understand their feeling—all that they hear and, forgive me, but a lot of the editorial content is that, "Oh, there are great tensions." There has been, let's say, more heat in rhetoric. There has not been more heat in the actual relationship. At the time that the rhetoric was being used from both sides, our negotiators were sitting there at the table negotiating. 
The President. Well, I would hope that the Soviet Union would remember their failure in trying to influence the German election and decide not to go down that road again. But as far as I am concerned, whoever our candidate may be, I don't think any decisions on a subject of this kind should be made on our part, on our side, on the basis of—as I said the other night—political considerations. 
We are going to continue to do everything we can to resume and achieve arms reductions, as sizable as we can make them, and ultimately I would hope total elimination of nuclear weapons. They have no real place in a civilized world. The goal is peace. And I've been a little disturbed by the tendency of so many in this country who seem to feel that somehow we're at fault, when they are the ones who left the table without setting a date for return. 
The President. Oh, we're in communication. We haven't broken off communications. We're not, as we've been portrayed, that the two superpowers are here separated with no contact at all. No, we're in communication with them. And we want to continue these policies that would lead toward reduction of arms and that would lead toward peace. 
I am prepared to say if the Soviet Government wants peace, there will be no war, because I know for a fact that no other country wants war with the Soviet Union. The ball is really in their court. If they want peace, they can have it. 
The President. I would have wished from the very first for a U.N. force. But what has prevented it? The Soviet Union veto. If you look at the UNIFIL [United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon] force that is presently in the south of Lebanon, it is so bound by restrictions that were imposed in order to get the Soviet Union vote that it literally is helpless to do anything. It isn't that these people are ineffective or that they aren't capable, they are restricted. 
The President. Well, I could still hope that the Soviet Union now would recognize the value of having a U.N. force in there. And as I say, we would have preferred this from the very first, but it was something that couldn't be obtained.
Where was I on
The President. Well, I've always been willing to go if there is a possibility of accomplishing something



Radio Address to the Nation on Christmas 
December 24, 1983

Let us remember the families who maintain a watch for their missing in action. And, yes, let us remember all those who are persecuted inside the Soviet bloc—not because they commit a crime, but because they love God in their hearts and want the freedom to celebrate Hanukkah or worship the Christ Child


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Elected Republican Women Officials 
January 13, 1984

In Europe, the NATO alliance has held firm despite months of Soviet bluster. Sooner or later the Soviets will realize that arms reductions are in their interest, too. And when they do, we'll be at the table waiting for them, ready to go on negotiating from strength and in good faith

We're very firm about that here, but security is one problem no matter how much you try to police something. We have just intercepted, as you know, a great shipment that was almost on its way through another country to the Soviet Union. And fortunately, our intelligence apparatus worked well enough that we intercepted and caught it there. It would have been of great assistance to anyone in improving their military capabilities. And we are working at that, and I think that our net is getting tighter and tighter in that regard. But we're very much aware of the problem, and we're not going to throw away any of these advantages

It is a magnificent report, and it substantiates the positions that we have been taking down there: There is a challenge to us to eliminate what has been going on for hundreds of years, the economic and social differences that make them vulnerable to this kind of takeover, but also the fact that you can't have social reforms while you're having your head shot off by guerrilla forces that are armed and supported by the Soviet Union and Cuba. And they confirmed that this is true. And so, we're going to follow up on this


Address to the Nation and Other Countries on United States-Soviet Relations 
January 16, 1984

During these first days of 1984, I would like to share with you and the people of the world my thoughts on a subject of great importance to the cause of peace—relations between the United States and the Soviet Union. 
Tomorrow the United States will join the Soviet Union and 33 other nations at a European disarmament conference in Stockholm. The conference will search for practical and meaningful ways to increase European security and preserve peace. We will be in Stockholm with the heartfelt wishes of our people for genuine progress. 
We live in a time of challenges to peace, but also of opportunities to peace. Through times of difficulty and frustration, America's highest aspiration has never wavered. We have and will continue to struggle for a lasting peace that enhances dignity for men and women everywhere. 
I believe that 1984 finds the United States in the strongest position in years to establish a constructive and realistic working relationship with the Soviet Union. We've come a long way since the decade of the seventies, years when the United States seemed filled with self-doubt and neglected its defenses, while the Soviet Union increased its military might and sought to expand its influence by armed forces and threat. 
Over the last 10 years, the Soviets devoted twice as much of their gross national product to military expenditures as the United States, produced six times as many ICBM's, four times as many tanks, twice as many combat aircraft. And they began deploying the SS-20 intermediate-range missile at a time when the United States had no comparable Weapon. 
America's recovery may have taken Soviet leaders by surprise. They may have counted on us to keep weakening ourselves. They've been saying for years that our demise was inevitable. They said it so often they probably started believing it. Well, if so, I think they can see now they were wrong. 
This may be the reason that we've been hearing such strident rhetoric from the Kremlin recently. These harsh words have led some to speak of heightened uncertainty and an increased danger of conflict. This is understandable but profoundly mistaken. 
Look beyond the words, and one fact stands out: America's deterrence is more credible, and it is making the world a safer place—safer because now there is less danger that the Soviet leadership will underestimate our strength or question ourresolve. 
Yes, we are safer now, but to say that our restored deterrence has made the world safer is not to say that it's safe enough. We're witnessing tragic conflicts in many parts of the world. Nuclear arsenals are far too high, and our working relationship with the Soviet Union is not what it must be. These are conditions which must be addressed and improved.
Deterrence is essential to preserve peace and protect our way of life, but deterrence is not the beginning and end of our policy toward the Soviet Union. We must and will engage the Soviets in a dialog as serious and constructive as possible—a dialog that will serve to promote peace in the troubled regions of the world, reduce the level of arms, and build a constructive working relationship. 
Neither we nor the Soviet Union can wish away the differences between our two societies and our philosophies, but we should always remember that we do have common interests and the foremost among them is to avoid war and reduce the level of arms. 
There is no rational alternative but to steer a course which I would call credible deterrence and peaceful competition. And if we do so, we might find areas in which we could engage in constructive cooperation. Our strength and vision of progress provide the basis for demonstrating with equal conviction ourcommitment to stay secure and to find peaceful solutions to problems through negotiations. That's why 1984 is a year of opportunities for peace. 
But if the United States and the Soviet Union are to rise to the challenges facing us and seize the opportunities for peace, we must do more to find areas of mutual interest and then build on them. 
I propose that our governments make a major effort to see if we can make progress in three broad problem areas. First, we need to find ways to reduce, and eventually to eliminate, the threat and use of force in solving international disputes. 
The world has witnessed more than 100 major conflicts since the end of World War II. Today there are armed conflicts in the Middle East, Afghanistan, Southeast Asia, Central America, and Africa. In other regions, independent nations are confronted by heavily armed neighbors seeking to dominate by threatening attack or subversion. Most of these conflicts have their origins in local problems, but many have been exploited by the Soviet Union and its surrogates. And, of course, Afghanistan has suffered an outright Soviet invasion. 
Fueling regional conflicts and exporting violence only exacerbate local tensions, increase suffering, and make solutions to real social and economic problems more difficult. Further, such activity carries with it the risk of larger confrontations. Would it not be better and safer if we could work together to assist people in areas of conflict in finding peaceful solutions to their problems? That should be our mutual goal. 
But we must recognize that the gap in American and Soviet perceptions and policy is so great that our immediate objective must be more modest. As a first step, our governments should jointly examine concrete actions that we both can take to reduce the risk of U.S.-Soviet confrontation in these areas. And if we succeed, we should be able to move beyond this immediate objective. 
Our second task should be to find ways to reduce the vast stockpiles of armaments in the world. It's tragic to see the world's developing nations spending more than $150 billion a year on armed forces—some 20 percent of their national budgets. We must find ways to reverse the vicious cycle of threat and response which drives arms races everywhere it occurs. 
With regard to nuclear weapons, the simple truth is America's total nuclear stockpile has declined. Today we have far fewer nuclear weapons than we had 20 years ago, and in terms of its total destructive power, our nuclear stockpile is at the lowest level in 25 years. 
Just 3 months ago, we and our allies agreed to withdraw 1,400 nuclear weapons from Western Europe. This comes after the withdrawal of 1,000 nuclear weapons from Europe 3 years ago. Even if all our planned intermediate-range missiles have to be deployed in Europe over the next 5 years-and we hope this will not be necessary—we will have eliminated five existing nuclear weapons for each new weapon deployed. 
But this is not enough. We must accelerate our efforts to reach agreements that will greatly reduce nuclear arsenals, provide greater stability, and build confidence. 
Our third task is to establish a better working relationship with each other, one marked by greater cooperation and understanding. Cooperation and understanding are built on deeds, not words. Complying with agreements helps; violating them hurts. Respecting the rights of individual citizens bolsters the relationship; denying these rights harms it. Expanding contacts across borders and permitting a free exchange or interchange of information and ideas increase confidence; sealing off one's people from the rest of the world reduces it. Peaceful trade helps, while organized theft of industrial secrets certainly hurts. 
Cooperation and understanding are especially important to arms control. In recent years we've had serious concerns about Soviet compliance with agreements and treaties. Compliance is important because we seek truly effective arms control. However, there's been mounting evidence that provisions of agreements have been violated and that advantage has been taken of ambiguities in our agreements. 
In response to a congressional request, a report on this will be submitted in the next few days. It is clear that we cannot simply assume that agreements negotiated will be fulfilled. We must take the Soviet compliance record into account, both in the development of our defense program and in our approach to arms control. 
In our discussions with the Soviet Union, we will work to remove the obstacles which threaten to undermine existing agreements and a broader arms control process. Examples I've cited illustrate why our relationship with the Soviet Union is not what it should be. We have a long way to go, but we're determined to try and try again. We may have to start in small ways, but start we must. 
In working on these tasks, our approach is based on three guiding principles—realism, strength, and dialog. Realism means we must start with a clear-eyed understanding of the world we live in. We must recognize that we are in a long-term competition with a government that does not share our notions of individual liberties at home and peaceful change abroad. We must be frank in acknowledging our differences and unafraid to promote our values. 
Strength is essential to negotiate successfully and protect our interests. If we're weak, we can do neither. Strength is more than military power. Economic strength is crucial, and America's economy is leading the world into recovery. Equally important is our strength of spirit and unity among our people at home and with our allies abroad. We're stronger in all these areas than we were 3 years ago. Our strength is necessary to deter war and to facilitate negotiated solutions. Soviet leaders know it makes sense to compromise only if they can get something in return. Well, America can now offer something in return. 
Strength and dialog go hand in hand, and we're determined to deal with our differences peacefully through negotiations. We're prepared to discuss the problems that divide us and to work for practical, fair solutions on the basis of mutual compromise. We will never retreat from negotiations. 
I have openly expressed my view of the Soviet system. I don't know why this should come as a surprise to Soviet leaders who've never shied from expressing their view of our system. But this doesn't mean that we can't deal with each other. We don't refuse to talk when the Soviets call us imperialist aggressors and worse, or because they cling to the fantasy of a Communist triumph over democracy. The fact that neither of us likes the other system is no reason to refuse to talk. Living in this nuclear age makes it imperative that we do talk. Ourcommitment to dialog is firm and unshakeable, but we insist that our negotiations deal with real problems, not atmospherics. 
In our approach to negotiations, reducing the risk of war, and especially nuclear war, is priority number one. A nuclear conflict could well be mankind's last. And that is why I proposed over 2 years ago the zero option for intermediate-range missiles. Our aim was and continues to be to eliminate an entire class of nuclear arms. Indeed, I support a zero option for all nuclear arms. As I've said before, my dream is to see the day when nuclear weapons will be banished from the face of the Earth. 
Last month the Soviet Defense Minister stated that his country would do everything to avert the threat of war. Well, these are encouraging words, but now is the time to move from words to deed. The opportunity for progress in arms control exists. The Soviet leaders should take advantage of it. 
We have proposed a set of initiatives that would reduce substantially nuclear arsenals and reduce the risk of nuclear confrontation. 
The world regrets—certainly we do—that the Soviet Union broke off negotiations on intermediate-range nuclear forces and has not set a date for the resumption of the talks on strategic arms and on conventional forces in Europe. Our negotiators are ready to return to the negotiating table to work toward agreements in INF, START, and MBFR. We will negotiate in good faith. Whenever the Soviet Union is ready to do likewise, we'll meet them halfway. 
We seek to reduce nuclear arsenals and to reduce the chances for dangerous misunderstanding and miscalculations, so we have put forward proposals for what we call confidence-building measures. They cover a wide range of activities. In the Geneva negotiations, we proposed to exchange advance notification of missile tests and major military exercises. Following up on congressional suggestions, we also proposed a number of ways to improve direct channels of communications. Last week, we had productive discussions with the Soviets here in Washington on improving communications, including the hotline. 
Now these bilateral proposals will be broadened at the conference in Stockholm. We're working with our allies to develop practical, meaningful ways to reduce the uncertainty and potential for misinterpretation surrounding military activities and to diminish the risk of surprise attack. 
Arms control has long been the most visible area of U.S.-Soviet dialog. But a durable peace also requires ways for both of us to diffuse tensions and regional conflicts. 
Take the Middle East as an example. Everyone's interest would be served by stability in the region, and our efforts are directed toward that goal. The Soviets could help reduce tensions there instead of introducing sophisticated weapons into the area. This would certainly help us to deal more positively with other aspects of our relationship. 
Another major problem in our relationship with the Soviet Union is human rights. Soviet practices in this area, as much as any other issue, have created the mistrust and ill will that hangs over our relationship. Moral considerations alone compel us to express our deep concern over prisoners of conscience in the Soviet Union and over the virtual halt in the emigration of Jews, Armenians, and others who wish to join their families abroad. 
Our request is simple and straightforward: that the Soviet Union live up to its obligations. It has freely assumed those obligations under international covenants, in particular its commitments under the Helsinki accords. 
Experience has shown that greater respect for human rights can contribute to progress in other areas of the Soviet-American relationship. Conflicts of interest between the United States and the Soviet Union are real, but we can and must keep the peace between our two nations and make it a better and more peaceful world for all mankind. 
Our policy toward the Soviet Union—a policy of credible deterrence, peaceful competition, and constructive cooperation—will serve our two nations and people everywhere. It is a policy not just for this year, but for the long term. It's a challenge for Americans; it is also a challenge for the Soviets. If they cannot meet us halfway, we will be prepared to protect our interests and those of our friends and allies. 
But we want more than deterrence. We seek genuine cooperation. We seek progress for peace. Cooperation begins With communication. And, as I've said, we'll stay at the negotiating tables in Geneva and Vienna. Furthermore, Secretary Shultz will be meeting this week with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in Stockholm. This meeting should be followed by others, so that high-level consultations become a regular and normal component of U.S.-Soviet relations. 
Our challenge is peaceful. It will bring out the best in us. It also calls for the best in the Soviet Union. We do not threaten the Soviet Union. Freedom poses no threat. It is the language of progress. We proved this 35 years ago when we had a monopoly on nuclear weapons and could have tried to dominate the world, but we didn't. Instead, we used our power to write a new chapter in the history of mankind. We helped rebuild war-ravaged economies in Europe and the Far East, including those of nations who had been our enemies. Indeed, those former enemies are now among our staunchest friends. 
We can't predict how the Soviet leaders will respond to our challenge. But the people of our two countries share with all mankind the dream of eliminating the risk of nuclear war. It's not an impossible dream, because eliminating these risks are so clearly a vitalinterest for all of us. Our two countries have never fought each other. There's no reason why we ever should. Indeed, we fought common enemies in World War II. Today our common enemies are poverty, disease, and above all, war. 
More than 20 years ago, President Kennedy defined an approach that is as valid today as when he announced it. "So let us not be blind to our differences," he said, "but let us also direct attention to our common interests and to the means by which those differences can be resolved." 
Well, those differences are differences in governmental structure and philosophy. The common interests have to do with the things of everyday life for people everywhere. Just suppose with me for a moment that an Ivan and an Anya could find themselves, oh, say, in a waiting room, or sharing a shelter from the rain or a storm with a Jim and Sally, and there was no language barrier to keep them from getting acquainted. Would they then debate the differences between their respective governments? Or would they find themselves comparing notes about their children and what each other did for a living? 
Before they parted company, they would probably have touched on ambitions and hobbies and what they wanted for their children and problems of making ends meet. And as they went their separate ways, maybe Anya would be saying to Ivan, "Wasn't she nice? She also teaches music." Or Jim would be telling Sally what Ivan did or didn't like about his boss. They might even have decided they were all going to get together for dinner some evening soon. Above all, they would have proven that people don't make wars. 
People want to raise their children in a world without fear and without war. They want to have some of the good things over and above bare subsistence that make life worth living. They want to work at some craft, trade, or profession that gives them satisfaction and a sense of worth. Their common interests cross all borders. 
If the Soviet Government wants peace, then there will be peace. Together we can strengthen peace, reduce the level of arms, and know in doing so that we have helped fulfill the hopes and dreams of those we represent and, indeed, of people everywhere. Let us begin now


Interview With Lou Cannon, David Hoffman, and Juan Williams of the Washington Post on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
January 16, 1984

The President. Yes. And it brought home to you that—and when you stop to think about it, I had to say to myself, I understand the necessity for this. This isn't something in which I could say, "Well, this is foolish. Isn't this excessive?" No. It isn't excessive. And you know that there's one person, yourself, who must be available for instant communication worldwide. U.S.-Soviet Relations 
The President. No. And really, I think they have been overplayed and overexaggerated in much of the talk about the present international situation. We are not in greater danger. We are not closer to a war than we were a few years ago. The rhetoric—and all you have to do is look back at the pattern of Soviet rhetoric, no matter who is in the White House, and what has been going on for years, that we're "imperialists," we're "aggressors," we're all of these things that they've been saying about us. No, I'm not repeating some of those things simply because I said them, and what I felt was necessary was for the Soviet Union to know that we were facing reality and that there was some realism on our part with regard to them and their style. 
Lou, let me take advantage of this to straighten something out, that ever since the first press conference, there has been a distortion of an answer of mine to a question there that has become just accepted, and that is that I called the Soviets a lot of names, gave an answer to a question about dealing with the Soviets. And everyone seems to have forgotten that I was quoting them with regard to lying, cheating, and so forth. I didn't say that, that that was my opinion of them. I made it very plain that they themselves, in their writing and speaking over the years, have said that anything of this kind that furthers socialism is moral. They do not view it as immoral if it furthers their cause. Lenin's famous line that "Treaties are like pie crusts. They're made to be broken." So 
The President. Yes. I thought that it was necessary that they know. Now, I did not volunteer that as a statement. It was an answer to a question. But I think it was necessary for them to know that we were looking at them realistically from here. There was an end to what, I think, maybe has been prevalent in some dealings for several years, and that is the idea that, well, they were just a mirror image of ourselves, and you could shake hands on someone's word and walkaway confident that a deal had been made. That, no, we were aware of the differences between our two societies in our approach to things, and we intended to deal with that realism. 
The President. Because—with realism on their part—we have a deterrent capacity we didn't have 3 years ago. Now, you are in danger if a possible adversary thinks that an action of his would not lead to unacceptable punishment. And I think the very fact that we have proceeded on this path would require them, with their realism, to say, this, it would be unacceptable, the damage to ourselves. 
The President. I have to say that, from all the reports that I'm getting, and from all the contact that I, myself, have—whether it's through mail or personal meetings or meeting new people, as well as old friends—that, yes, there is a new feeling on the part of the American people. They have a confidence that they didn't have just a short time ago when they knew that the Soviet Union had engaged in this massive arms buildup and they saw evidences that we hadn't. 


Remarks to the Reagan Administration Executive Forum 
January 20, 1984

Overseas, American influence—always the strongest force for peace in the world-was shrinking. We Americans watched, seemingly helpless, as the Soviets amassed vast military might, then intimidated our allies, fueled regional conflicts, and propped up dictators around the world

He wrote back and said, "Number one, Grenada produces more nutmeg than any place in the world. Number two, the Soviets and the Cubans are trying to take Grenada. Number three, you can't make good eggnog without nutmeg." [Laughter] "And number four, you can't have Christmas without eggnog." [Laughter] "Number five, the Soviets and the Cubans are trying to steal Christmas." [Laughter] "And number six, we stopped them." [Laughter] 
In Europe, the NATO alliance has held firm, despite months of Soviet bluster. Sooner or later the Soviets are going to realize that equitable and verifiable arms reductions are in their interest, too. And, as I made clear in my address earlier this week, when they do, we'll be at the table, waiting for them, ready to go on negotiating real arms reductions. And we'll be determined that they will abide by the agreements that they have made. By strengthening our defenses and showing the world our willingness to negotiate, we have laid the foundation for a lasting world peace


Remarks at a Luncheon Sponsored by the Senate Republican Policy Committee 
January 24, 1984

In foreign policy America had become known the world over for hesitation, vacillation, and self-doubt. And our great nation stood by as if paralyzed while the Soviets amassed a vast military might, then began to intimidate our allies, fuel regional conflicts, and prop up tyrannies. And when Americans looked to their leaders for encouragement, they only heard about a so-called national malaise

In foreign policy, the world knows once more what America stands for: the freedom of mankind. From Central America to Africa to the Middle East, we're working to support democracy and produce peace. In Lebanon, the peace process has been slow and painful, but we've made genuine progress. In Europe the NATO alliance has held firm. In our dealings with the Soviets, by strengthening our defenses and showing the world our willingness to negotiate, we've laid the foundations for a lasting world peace. And on an island in the Caribbean, we set a nation free. 
He had broken the code, six points in breaking that code. Number one, Grenada does produce more nutmeg than any other place on Earth. Number two, the Soviets and Cubans were trying to take Grenada. Number three, you can't make eggnog without nutmeg. [Laughter] Number four, you can't have Christmas without eggnog. Number five, the Soviets and the Cubans were trying to steal Christmas. [Laughter] And, number six, we stopped them. [Laughter]

Excerpt of Remarks During a Meeting With Network Anchors on United States-Soviet Relations 
January 25, 1984

The President. Well, I saw it as that he, himself, expressed what we have; that he believes there should be a dialog on some of the problems confronting us. So do I. 

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union 
January 25, 1984

Together, we can continue to advance our agenda for peace. We can establish a more stable basis for peaceful relations with the Soviet Union; strengthen allied relations across the board; achieve real and equitable reductions in the levels of nuclear arms; reinforce our peacemaking efforts in the Middle East, Central America, and southern Africa; or assist developing countries, particularly our neighbors in the Western Hemisphere; and assist in the development of democratic institutions throughout the world

Tonight, I want to speak to the people of the Soviet Union, to tell them it's true that our governments have had serious differences, but our sons and daughters have never fought each other in war. And if we Americans have our way, they never will. 
People of the Soviet Union, there is only one sane policy, for your country and mine, to preserve our civilization in this modern age: A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought. The only value in our two nations possessing nuclear weapons is to make sure they will never be used. But then would it not be better to do away with them entirely? 
People of the Soviet, President Dwight Eisenhower, who fought by your side in World War II, said the essential struggle "is not merely man against man or nation against nation. It is man against war." Americans are people of peace. If your government wants peace, there will be peace. We can come together in faith and friendship to build a safer and far better world for our children and our children's children. And the whole world will rejoice. That is my message to you.



Remarks at a Spirit of America Rally in Atlanta, Georgia 
January 26, 1984

Sooner or later the Soviets will realize they have nothing to gain by waiting. Good faith negotiations are in their interest, because the West could offer them many benefits their people now lack. People don't make wars; governments do. And if the Soviet Union wants peace, there will be peace


Remarks at the Southern Republican Leadership Conference in Atlanta, Georgia 
January 26, 1984

In six steps he had broken the code. Number one, Grenada does produce more nutmeg than any other place on Earth. Number two, the Soviets and the Cubans are trying to take Grenada. Number three, you can't have Christmas—or you can't make eggnog—you can't make eggnog without nutmeg. Number four, you can't have Christmas without eggnog. Number five, the Soviets and the Cubans were trying to steal Christmas. [Laughter] And, he wrote, number six, we stopped them. [Laughter]


Remarks at a White House Meeting With Republican Congressmen 
January 27, 1984

In Europe, the NATO alliance has held firm. In our dealings with the Soviets, by strengthening our defenses and showing the world our willingness to negotiate, we've laid the foundations for a lasting world peace. And on an island in the Caribbean, we set a nation free


Interview With Thomas DeFrank and Eleanor Clift of Newsweek on the 1984 Presidential Election 
January 27, 1984

In the international area, to really carry forward the effort to achieve real reduction of weapons. To set the stage for real negotiations with the Soviet Union, leading to peace in the world. To complete something that I started early on in my administration with regard to our neighbors south of the border, that I don't think we've ever carried out properly, and that is a friendship and a pattern of partnership in all these countries of the Americas that are so unique in this hemisphere. All of these things that remain unfinished


Interview With David Hartman of ABC News on the 1984 Presidential Election 
January 30, 1984

I don't know when they will get out. The mission remains the same. We are studying right now things that we can do to hopefully see that no tragedies of the kind we've had happen again. U.S.-Soviet Relations 
The President. Well, what they need to find out—and maybe in the campaign ahead we'll have an opportunity to tell them—we're not in more danger. We are safer and more secure than we were several years ago. 
There have been four wars in my lifetime. None of them started because the United States was too strong. 
The President. We have been more flexible. They are the ones who have been adamant. They have not come back when we meet some terms of theirs and say, "All right, let's negotiate on this." They have nothing to offer. Now, we're 
The President. No.
The President. No. We're saying, "We'll be at the table; come on back." They made a statement on the START talks. They made one statement about something of-well, they were willing to discuss a certain number of missiles, a certain number of planes, a certain number of missiles and submarines. And we've said, "We're ready to talk on that. We'd like to then throw in some limitations on the number of warheads"—total warheads, because each missile carries more than one warhead. They haven't come back

Remarks of President Reagan and President Mika Spiljak of Yugoslavia Following Their Meetings
February 1, 1984

Yugoslavia, like other nations of Europe, hopes for progress in arms control negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union. I conveyed to President Spiljak our deeper commitment to reach equitable, verifiable agreements with the Soviet Union. Such agreements would be in our interest, the Soviet Union's interest, and in the interest of all mankind. We're flexible and realistic in pursuit of this goal and share the President's hope that the negotiations will resume in the near future


Remarks at a Republican Congressional Luncheon
February 2, 1984

With them in control, our defenses would still be growing weaker while the Soviets grew bolder. Troops would have landed on Grenada, that's for sure. They just wouldn't have been American troops. And the Grenadians wouldn't have been applauding


Interview With Robert L. Bartley and Albert R. Hunt of the Wall Street Journal on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
February 2, 1984

The President. You're talking about our reporting to the Congress on supposed violations or apparent violations. That is required of us by an act of Congress. We didn't just go runningout and say, "Hey, let's blow the whistle on the Soviets if they're doing something." They demanded that. And we gave them as exactly as we could the evidence that we had as to whether there were things that were actually apparent violations of an agreement. There were some that were ambiguous and that gave the appearance of that. And we presented that evidence, their evaluation, whatever they wanted to evaluate. But we also said— 
The President. Yes, we said that this only strengthens our position of insisting that a major part of any future treaties must be verification, the ability to verify whether the treaties are being kept. 
The President. Well, we call them to the attention—and have—to the Soviet Union. But, as I say, I think that in the negotiations that we hope will resume, that this is our evidence as to why we're justified in seeking full verification. 
The President. My ambition, or my dream, for—if there is a defensive weapon—you see, here's a new weapon in the world and for the first time it is a weapon that has no defense against it, except deterrence, that we each have it. It's like two fellows with a gun pointed at each other, both of them cocked and both with their fingers on the trigger, and we're going to stand, spend the rest of our life doing that. 
My dream was that if we could find a weapon that offered a defense against those, we could then immediately take the next step and say, "Now, doesn't common sense dictate that we eliminate these weapons?" And that would include our own. If we had the defensive weapon and no one else had it, but we also had the missiles, wouldn't it be the proof of our sincerity if we said, "Look, we've got it made. We've got both now. And we tell you we will eliminate ours, along with everyone else." 
Dwight Eisenhower wrote a letter to a publisher in his closing days in office, and he said, "We are coming to a point at which for the first time in history we have weapons that render obsolete any of the previous notions we've ever had about victory or defeat in war, that there can be with these weapons no defeat or victory as we have known it, only the destruction of mankind." Now, he said, "Reaching that point, isn't it time that we sat down together and figured out a better way to settle disputes than by war?" 
Well, I feel that way very definitely. And I think that the—my hope is that if we can continue, resume the negotiations with regard to nuclear weapons—we are going to; the date is set for the MBFR negotiations-but the others, that starting down that road, everyone will see the wisdom of total elimination. 
The President. Well, I think that what we're seeing is a part of negotiations. And I think that what we've accomplished here is what I had talked about. And I said then, also in that campaign over and over again, that I would stay at a table—well, meaning our country, our negotiators stay at a table as long as was necessary to bring about a reduction in arms. 
The SALT treaties—and the reason I've never been enthusiastic about them, they were simply trying to set caps on how many more you could have. And I was shocked when a knowledgeable person in that field told me shortly after I arrived in this office, that had we ratified SALT II, under the terms of that treaty, the Soviet Union would have been able to add the equivalent of the megatonnage that we dropped on Hiroshima—every 11 minutes since the treaty was ratified. 
Now, the reason for negotiating, I feel, must be to reduce the weapons. Now, you're asking about—I think that it is too early to say this. We do know this. We know that they are pretty much at their maximum of output and have been for a long time. We also know that we have been unilaterally disarming over a period of years. 
They didn't have to demand that we eliminate a B-1 bomber. Even without going to a negotiating table we canceled it. And we were doing this with weapons. We were reducing our Navy. We were unilaterally disarming. Now, it seemed to me that the only way that we were going to convince them that common sense called for reduction of arms was to build our own defenses to where we had a deterrent capacity, but to make it evident that we were going to maintain a deterrent policy. They would then have to look and say, how much would they have to build to try and get a sufficient advantage over us, and I don't think they can. And I think then they know that. They know the industrial might of this nation

Remarks at a White House Luncheon for Elected Republican Women Officials 
February 3, 1984

In Lebanon, the peaceful process has been painfully slow, but we have made genuine progress. In Europe, the NATO alliance has remained united and strong. Our relations in the Far East have never been better. In our relations with the Soviet Union, by strengthening our defenses and making clear our determination to negotiate, we have laid the foundation for meaningful agreements and a safer, more peaceful world. On an island in the Caribbean, we rescued Americans and set a nation free.


Remarks at Eureka College in Eureka, Illinois 
February 6, 1984

The consequences of America's retreat were not long in coming. All of you can remember a few years back when the tragedy of the Iranian hostages was fresh in our minds; when around the world, especially in Afghanistan and Central America, Soviet expansionism proceeded unchecked; when our defenses had declined dramatically and some nations thought they could threaten or harm the United States with impunity

Peace remains our highest aspiration, and that's why arms control isn't enough. Arms reduction is our goal. And may I interject right here—I, a few years ago, stood in this exact spot and made the announcement then that we were going to ask for arms reduction meetings with the Soviet Union to reduce the number of strategic nuclear weapons we both held. But then, as we have tried to communicate to the people of the Soviet Union, would it not be better to do away with nuclear weapons entirely? I think our new realism is an important means to this end.

In economics, for example, as the recent Nobel Prizes to Fredrick von Hayek, Milton Friedman, and George Stigler attest, the free market is again becoming the focal point. In political philosophy, a whole generation of intellectuals led especially by French thinkers like Revel, Jean Marie Benoit, Guy Sorman are rejecting the old cliches about state power and rediscovering the danger such power poses to personal freedom. Russian intellectuals ranging from majestic figures like Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn to noble crusaders like Vladimir Bukovsky have brought new attention to the horrors of totalitarian rule and to the spiritual desert that is communism



Remarks at the Annual Convention of the National Association of Secondary School Principals in Las Vegas, Nevada 
February 7, 1984

Compare that to the case in other industrialized countries. In Japan, specialized study in mathematics, biology, and physics starts in sixth grade. In the Soviet Union, students learn the basic concepts of algebra and geometry in elementary school. So, it's not surprising that Japan, with a population only about half the size of ours graduates from college more engineers than we do, while the Soviet Union graduates from college almost five times more engineering specialists than we do.


Radio Address to the Nation on United States-Soviet Relations 
February 11, 1984

I'd like to speak to you about a subject always on the minds of Americans, but of particular interest today in view of the death of Soviet leader Yuriy Andropov: our relations with the Soviet Union. 
Changes of leadership have not happened often in the Soviet Union. Yuriy Andropov was only the sixth Communist Party leader in the 66 years since the Russian Revolution. In recent months, he'd been totally absent from public view, so his death did not come as a shock to the world. Nevertheless, the importance of the U.S.-Soviet relationship makes his passing away a time for reflection on where that relationship is heading. 
The changes in Moscow are an opportunity for both nations to examine closely the current state of our relations and to think about the future. We know that our relationship is not what we would like it to be. We've made no secret of our views as to the reasons why. What is needed now is for both sides to sit down and find ways of solving some of the problems that divide us. 
In expressing my condolences to Mr. Andropov's family and to the Soviet Government, I emphasized once again America's desire for genuine cooperation between our two countries. Together we can help make the world a better, more peaceful place. This was also the message for the Soviet people in my address on Soviet-American relations last month. In that speech, as in my private communications with the late Chairman Andropov, I stressed ourcommitment to a serious and intensive dialog with the Soviet Union, one aimed at building a more constructive U.S.-Soviet relationship. 
This commitment remains firm, and Vice President Bush will lead our delegation to Moscow for Mr. Andropov's funeral. He will be accompanied by Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker and our Ambassador in Moscow, Arthur Hartman. I hope there will be an opportunity for the Vice President to meet with the new General Secretary. 
As we engage in discussions with Soviet leaders, we recognize the fundamental differences in our values and in our perspectives on many international issues. We must be realistic and not expect that these differences can be wished away. But realism should also remind us that our two peoples share common bonds and interests. We are both relatively young nations with rich ethnic traditions and a pioneer philosophy. We have both experienced the terrible trauma of war. We have fought side by side in the victory over Nazi Germany. And while our governments have very different views, our sons and daughters have never fought each other. We must make sure they never do. 
Avoiding war and reducing arms is a starting point in our relationship with the Soviet Union, but we seek to accomplish more. With a good-faith effort on both sides, I believe the United States and the Soviet Union could begin rising above the mistrust and ill will that cloud our relations. We could establish a basis for greater mutual understanding and constructive cooperation, and there's no better time to make that good-faith effort than now. 
At this time of transition in the Soviet Union, our two nations should look to the future. We should find ways to work together to meet the challenge of preserving peace. Living in this nuclear age makes it imperative that we talk to each other, discuss our differences, and seek solutions to the many problems that divide us. 
America is ready. We would welcome negotiations. And I repeat today what I've said before: We're prepared to meet the Soviets halfway in the search for mutually acceptable agreements. I hope the leaders of the Soviet Union will work with us in that same spirit. I invite them to take advantage of the opportunities at hand to establish a more stable and constructive relationship. If the Soviet Government wants peace, then there will be peace. 
In recent days, millions of citizens inside the Soviet Union, the United States, and countries throughout the world have been brought together by one great event, the winter Olympics. The competition is fierce, and we cheer for the men and women on our respective teams. But we can and should celebrate the triumphs of all athletes who compete in the true spirit of sportsmanship and give the very best of themselves. And when each race or event is done and our teams come together in friendship, we will remember that we are meant to be one family of nations. 
We who are leaders in government have an obligation to strive for cooperation every bit as hard as our athletes, who reach within for the greatest efforts of their lives. If the Soviet Government would join us in this spirit, then together we could build a safer and far better world for the human family, not just for today but for generations to come


Interview With the Knight-Ridder News Service on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
February 13, 1984

The President. Well, the only thing that I can say is that in this case you have to wait and see what the position's going to be. I do think that when there is a change of leadership, the new individual hasn't been on record with any positions that might cause him problems in shifting position or with regard to discussions and so forth. So, the message that I've sent with Vice President Bush is one in which we should begin to talk and negotiate on the problems that, at the moment, lie between us. 
The President. Well, I think just to get acquainted—obviously you'd get acquainted if you had a summit meeting, but, no, I think it still remains that you should have an agenda to have such a meeting that lays out the issues that we need to discuss. 
The President. Well, that—you see, so far in the disarmament talks, for example, we have put the positions on the table. They have not come back, in reality, with any substantive positions of their own. And, in one set of negotiations where they did, we met them halfway. We proposed, then, a change in our original position. And this is what we mean: that to negotiate, one side just can't sit silent and say, "We don't like your first proposal, make another one." Well then, they could sit there forever while we try to think up new proposals. No, they've got to come back with something that they think meets whatever objections they had to our proposal, and then we discuss those points to see if there's a common meeting ground. And we're willing to do that. 
But it's not only just the disarmament thing where they've walked away from the table. I think all the things that have them feeling that it is necessary to keep the world in kind of armed camps—they would be far better off, the world would be far better off, if we would find those areas where we could be a family of nations and settle our disputes and get along. 
The President. Well, I think that George is taking a message that makes that plain, that the time has come or has long since passed for talking about a number of the contentious issues between us. And, again, this comes down to where there's a—the world kind of assumes that if there is a halt in our discussions or if there's some strain, it must be our fault. Well, we didn't walkaway from the table, they did. And we have, over and over again, said, "We'll be waiting. Come back to the table." 
The President. Well, communications can be opened at many levels, and we want to have communication with them. 
The President. Well, let me—again, if I understand your question correctly, let's take the INF talks. I proposed what I think is a very commonsense idea, that in the intermediate-range weapons—more than a thousand of which are poised on their side against the European allies, and we, at the request of the allies, a request that was made in 1979 and approved by the Government-then Government of the United States, and of which we are implementing-that a far more sensible proposal would be to agree on zero; no intermediaterange weapons in Europe on either side. They refused to even discuss such a thing. So, we came back and said, "All right then, let us meet and discuss whatever reduced number you are willing to settle for." And the negotiations started, and those are the negotiations that have broken off. So, I think this demonstrated some flexibility on our part. 
In the START talks, we found that our proposal to start by discussing the landbased ballistic missiles and then discuss the submarine-launched, airborne, and so forth. But in our thinking, the land-based were the most destabilizing to the people—the thought that someone pushes a button, and then there's no retrieval; it's on its way, and 20 minutes later, 30 minutes later, something blows up. And they had objections to that because of their own standpoint. We immediately countered, because we saw some merit in their objection, and we said, "All right, we'll put them all in, and we'll talk about them all at once, not in stages." 
So, I think that we have demonstrated a flexibility; but when they walked away, they left nothing on the table. We had made a new proposal and left it on the table, and they walked away from it. 
The President. At least come back and start telling us if they didn't like it, what they didn't like and what they would prefer. 
The President. I don't know. I've seen all the speculation on that that has appeared in the media as to quoting previous statements that he has made or not. I hope that we could have a change in approach
Now, they were a little like what I said about the Russians a little bit earlier in disarmament. They sit there and say, you know, "We don't like that figure. Give us another one." Well, that's notnegotiating
Now, what we knew about the Cuban presence there, we knew that there was some ability to fight back. We also knew that Cuba was a lot closer than we were, and we knew—we did not even confirm to those other nations that had asked for our help the absolute decision because of this concern. And we didn't see—they only had 48 hours to plan that operation—we didn't see how we could run the risk of having to notify people that something was going to take place. And for once we did have something that was absolutely secure, and no word was out until we ourselves called the Cubans and the Russians and told them— guaranteed the safety of their people. They didn't resist



Remarks at a Fundraiser for Republican Women Candidates on the Occasion of Susan B. Anthony's Birthday 
February 15, 1984

And that brings me to our relationship with the Soviet Union. We know it isn't what we want it to be. Time and again in public statements and in private communications to the Soviet leadership I've stressed ourcommitment to a serious and intensive dialog, one aimed at building a more constructive relationship, avoiding war, and reducing arms as a starting point. But we want to accomplish much more, and for that we need a good-faith effort on both sides. That's the message Vice President Bush carried to Moscow earlier this week. 
Let me share with you the Vice President's impressions of the new Soviet leadership that he passed to me following his meeting in the Kremlin. The atmosphere was positive. Although Secretary Chernenko did not depart from standard Soviet positions, he did appear ready to put our relationship on a more constructive basis. Vice President Bush and I have the impression that the new Soviet leadership is making an effort to downplay rhetoric and to explore ways to promote a more useful dialog. 
America has always been willing to meet the Soviets halfway to find solutions to the many problems that divide us and to reach fair arms reduction agreements. If the new Soviet leadership decides to join us in a good faith effort we can accomplish much good together, and there's no better time to start than right now. If the Soviet Government wants peace, then there will be peace.


Remarks at a White House Luncheon for Elected Republican Women Officials 
February 17, 1984

And that brings me to two final points. The first has to do with the Soviet Union. For the first time in years, we're on the way to restoring a constructive dialog, one that builds stability and is so essential for peace. Time and again, in public statements and in private communications to the Soviet leadership, I've stressed ourcommitment to a serious and intensive dialog, one aimed at building a more constructive relationship. Avoiding war and reducing arms is the starting point. 
America has always been ready to meet the Soviets halfway. To find solutions to the many problems that divide us and to reach fair arms reduction agreements. If the new Soviet leadership decides to join us in a good-faith effort, we can accomplish much good together. And there's no better time to start than right now

Remarks at an Iowa Caucus Rally in Waterloo 
February 20, 1984

Six stages. Number 1: Grenada produces more nutmeg than any other spot on Earth. Number 2: The Soviets and the Cubans are trying to take Grenada. Number 3: You cannot make good eggnog without nutmeg. [Laughter] Number 4: You can't have Christmas without eggnog. [Laughter] Number 5: The Soviets and the Cubans were trying to steal Christmas. And Number 6: We stopped them

We said we would lift the grain embargo, and we did. We said we would help restore the reputation of American farmers as reliable suppliers, and we negotiated a new long-term grain agreement with the Soviets. We promised to lift the burden of surpluses off the back of agriculture, and most surpluses have been cut. Prices are still too low, but they're stronger than they were, and this year farm costs will decline

Peace is our highest aspiration. A lasting peace must be anchored by courage, realism, and unity. We must go beyond the control of nuclear weapons to actual reductions. And my dream is to see a day when nuclear weapons will be banished from the Earth all together. We remain flexible in our bargaining. I've repeatedly stressed this to the Soviets, and we're beginning to see some positive signs. But I must make one thing plain: As Commander in Chief, I have an obligation to protect this country, and I will neverallow political expediency to influence these crucial negotiations


The President's News Conference
February 22, 1984
And we've had a naval force for a long time, virtually permanently stationed in the Arabian Sea, and so have some of our allies. But we'll keep that open to shipping. U.S.-Soviet Relations 



Remarks of President Reagan and President Rudolf Kirchschlager of Austria at the State Dinner 
February 28, 1984

Given your history and geography, Austria is vitally interested in the state of East-West relations. From the beginning of my tenure in office, Mr. President, I have emphasized that in our dealings with the Soviet Union, we should be guided by realism, proceed from a position of strength, and be ready at all times to engage in efforts to reach equitable and verifiable agreements. Your country's very existence as a free and independent nation proves what patient, persistent negotiations with the Soviets can produce. We welcome the wisdom of your counsel and rest assured that we will continue this policy in the hope that it will yield the results for which the world yearns.


Remarks at a White House Briefing for the National Alliance of Senior Citizens 
February 29, 1984

In Europe the NATO alliance, which was kind of trembling for a while, has held firm. And as for arms talks, we hope the Soviets will come back to the negotiating table soon. And when they do, they'll find American negotiators waiting for them, ready to come to equitable and verifiable agreements. In the meantime, we and our NATO allies will remain steadfast in the defense of our freedom and the protection of world peace


Remarks at an Event Sponsored by the American Legion Auxiliary 
March 1, 1984

Across the globe, Soviet expansionism, once unchecked, has now been blunted. And for the first time in a long while, an American administration is leveling with the American people and the rest of the world about the crucial nature of the struggle between democracy and totalitarianism


Remarks on Signing an Agreement With Morocco To Modernize the Voice of America Relay Station in Tangier 
March 1, 1984

The Voice of America has been a strong voice for truth, and despite problems of antiquated equipment and Soviet jamming, the Voice of America has been able to spread its message of truth around the world


Remarks at a White House Luncheon for Elected Republican Women Officials 
March 2, 1984

In foreign policy, we're acting with a new firmness and sense of purpose. From Central America to Western Europe to an island called Grenada, we've worked to defend freedom and peace. And while events in Lebanon have been painful, our presence there has prevented far greater destruction and loss of life than would otherwise have taken place. In our dealings with the Soviets, the prospects for world peace stand on a new and firm footing


Remarks at the Annual Conservative Political Action Conference Dinner 
March 2, 1984

Peace with freedom is our highest aspiration—a lasting peace anchored by courage, realism, and unity. We've stressed our willingness to meet the Soviets halfway in talks on strategic weapons. But as Commander in Chief, I have an obligation to protect this country, and I will neverallow political expediency to influence these crucial negotiations


Remarks of the President and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of the Federal Republic of Germany Following Their Meetings 
March 5, 1984

We both agreed that 1983 was a crucial year for the NATO alliance. The leaders of the Western democracies stood firm in the face of an intense Soviet campaign of intimidation aimed at blocking NATO deployment of new intermediate-range missiles. To its common credit, the alliance demonstrated its determination to restore the military balance in Europe and maintain a credible nuclear deterrence and emerge stronger from the challenge. Thanks to the courage and vision of leaders like Chancellor Kohl, we can point to the past year with pride and look to the future with confidence. 
Both Chancellor Kohl and myself would prefer to achieve a nuclear balance through arms reduction. Today I reconfirmed my willingness, eagerness to continue to effort to reach arms reduction agreements with the Soviet Union. Both Chancellor Kohl and I agreed that, with new leadership in the Kremlin, an opportunity exists for real progress in relations between East and West. However, in the face of Soviet intransigence at the negotiating table, a table which we remain ready to return to any time, the alliance will continue to strengthen its conventional and nuclear deterrent. 
In the Declaration of Brussels last December, the NATO Foreign Ministers affirmed our offer to establish constructive contacts and dialog with the Soviets. I reaffirmed to Chancellor Kohl today my personal commitment to explore every possible avenue for improvement of relations with the East. And I'm ready to meet personally with the Soviet leadership if such a meeting is well prepared and holds promise of fruitful results


Remarks at the Annual Convention of the National Association of Evangelicals in Columbus, Ohio 
March 6, 1984

And if the new Soviet leadership is willing, we will renew our efforts to ease tensions between East and West. And while we will never accept for ourselves their system, we will never stop praying that the leaders, like so many of their own people, might come to know the liberating nature of faith in God


Remarks at a New York Republican Party Fund-raising Dinner 
March 6, 1984

In 1981 we went to work repairing the damage done by those who believe that a weaker America is a safer America. We continue to strive for realistic arms reduction negotiations with the Soviet Union. But, to be taken seriously, the Soviets must know that we're not going to simply give them what they want without concessions in return. Make no mistake, those who callfor gutting the defense budget are undercutting our chances for arms reduction agreements with the Soviets. Those who condemn the United States any time a stand is taken against aggression are flirting with disaster. 
I have to interrupt again and tell a little incident about Grenada. Some weeks after Grenada—and some of our troops that had gone there came home—I received a message from a marine lieutenant who flew a Cobra. He was at Grenada and then had gone on to Beirut. And the message that he sent back was to the Armed Forces Journal in the Pentagon. He said that in Grenada he realized that every news story spelled out, in some place in the story, that Grenada produced more nutmeg than any other place in the world. And he finally decided the regularity of this must have been a code, and he was going to break the code. So, he sent me the message that in six points he had broken the code. Number one: Grenada produces more nutmeg than any other spot on Earth. Number two: The Soviets and the Cubans are trying to take Grenada. Number three: You cannot make good eggnog without nutmeg. [Laughter] Number four: You cannot have Christmas without eggnog. [Laughter] Number five: The Soviets and the Cubans were trying to steal Christmas. [Laughter] And number six: We stopped them. [Laughter]

Interview With Southeast Regional Editors on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
March 12, 1984

The President. If they were responsible, they would, because the very thing that they're talking about we are going to be ready very shortly to table a treaty for discussion of banning chemical weapons. We know that's the way to go. But the reason why they would be more of help if they would okay the spending is, how better to get the other side, then, to agree to a treaty with us banning this; how much better able we'll be if they know that if they don't do that, they will have to face the fact that we have chemical weapons that we can use against them


Remarks at the Young Leadership Conference of the United Jewish Appeal 
March 12, 1984
In the Soviet Union, Jews are virtually forbidden to teach Hebrew to their children, are limited to a small number of synagogues, and cannot publish books of Hebrew liturgy. Emigration of Jews from the Soviet Union has been brought to a near standstill. Prominent Jews like Iosif Begun have been arraigned in mock trials and given harsh sentences. Hebrew scholars like Lev Furman have seen their teaching materials robbed and their homes ransacked. And Jewish dissidents like Anatoly Shcharanskiy have been put in mental wards or thrown in jail. We must support Soviet Jews in their struggle for basic rights, and I urge all Americans to observe the International Day of Concern for Soviet Jews this Thursday, day after tomorrow, March 15th

First, we must keep America strong. During the seventies the United States made a conscious choice to restrict its military development, fervently hoping the Soviets would respond in kind. Well, during those 10 years our spending on defense dropped over 20 percent in real terms. We canceled major weapons programs, reduced our nuclear stockpile to its lowest level in 20 years, and slackened in the training of our Armed Forces. Between 1968 and 1978, we cut our Navy, the fleet, by more than half. 
But far from responding to our good intentions with restraint, the Soviets launched the most massive military buildup in world history. From 1974 to 1980, they outproduced us in practically every category of weapons: 3 times more tanks, twice as many tactical combat aircraft, 5 times more ICBM's, and 15 times more ballistic missile submarines. By 1980 total Soviet military investment was more than 1.5 times ours. 
President Carter's Secretary of Defense, Harold Brown, put it very well. He acknowledged a bitter lesson about Soviet practice in saying, "When we build, .they build. When we don't build, they build." 
But we've only begun to repair past damage. Make no mistake: If we heed those who would cripple America's rebuilding program, we will undermine our own security and the security of our closest friends, like Israel, and I am not prepared to let that happen. After two decades of military expansion by the Soviet Union and a decade of neglect by the United States, we're struggling not to regain the superiority we once enjoyed, but simply to restore the military equivalence we need to keep the peace. 
Our administration has repeatedly and vigorously protested the persecution of Jews and others in the Soviet Union and other Communist nations. We're also using our influence with countries that receive American assistance to give human rights firm support. In El Salvador, we're insisting that the leaders take steps to end human rights abuse. And although El Salvador is far from perfect, we've seen marked progress
Standing steadfast with our allies in support of greater economic growth and of peace with freedom is our third great challenge. Our administration is working hard to do just that. In Europe we and our NATO allies have shown the Soviets our willingness to negotiate and our unshakable resolve to defend Western Europe. In the Far East, we are strengthening our ties to the Asian democracies and developing our relations with China. In Central America we have supported democracy and fostered economic development. And in the Middle East we have strengthened our relations with a nation close to your heart and mine—the State of Israel.
Now, let me take a moment to describe our relations with Israel and our efforts in the Middle East. Israel and the United States are bound together by the ties of friendship, shared ideals, and mutual interests. We're allies in the defense of freedom in the Middle East. The United States was the first nation to recognize the State of Israel, and ever since, our support for Israel has remained unflinching. Today, when even our NATO allies vote with us in the United States [United Nations] only some 6 out of 10 votes, the alliance between the United States and Israel is so strong that we vote together more than nine times out of ten. 
First, the U.S.-Israeli strategic relationship has been elevated and formalized. This is the first time in Israel's history that a formal strategic relationship has existed. The new American-Israeli Joint Political-Military Group is working to decide how the U.S. and Israel can counter the threat that growing Soviet involvement in the Middle East poses to our mutual interests. Our cooperation adds to deterrence and improves and protects the prospects for peace and security. The negotiations have been positive, and they're moving forward. 
First, we must deter the Soviet threat. As the crossroad between three continents and the source of oil for much of the industrialized world, the Middle East is of enormous strategic importance. Were the Soviets to control the region—and they have expanded their influence there in a number of ways, notably, by stationing 7,000 troops and advisers in Syria—the entire world would be vulnerable to economic blackmail. Their brutal war against the Afghan people continues with increasing ferocity. We must notallow them to dominate the region.


Interview With Agence France Presse on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
March 15, 1984

And also I will be discussing with him the East-West relations and what our goals are, because we are determined to bring about arms reductions and to get conversations restored with the Soviet Union to where we can discuss face to face the problems that only we can solve

Central America and the Caribbean are of the utmost strategic importance to the United States. What we are witnessing to the south is a power play by Cuba and the Soviet Union, pure and simple. Cuba, after nearly 25 years of so-called revolution, is an economic basket case. It cannot supply even its own needs without massive and costly Soviet subsidies. Like a roving wolf, Cuba looks to its peace-loving neighbors with hungry eyes. We want to avert a crisis before it happens—to help our neighbors build strong economies and democratic governments and to counter Soviet-backed insurgency. The way to end hostilities in El Salvador, for example, is through free elections. But we see those who oppose democracy now trying, through violence, to disrupt the March 25 elections there


Text of the President's Remarks During a Meeting With Cuban-American Leaders 
March 19, 1984

You know how significant our struggle is, not only for our neighbors to the south but for the United States, as well. I can assure you today that our administration fully recognizes the vital importance of the economic, political, and military struggle going on in Central America and the Caribbean. We do not intend to let the Soviet Union, through its Communist Cuban proxies, take over that region. 
Central America and the Caribbean are of the utmost strategic importance to the United States. If we don't give friends so close to home the means to defend themselves against Soviet-supported insurgents, who will trust us anywhere in the world, especially in the faraway Middle East and Europe? 
What we are witnessing to the south is a power play by Cuba and the Soviet Union, pure and simple. Cuba, after nearly 25 years of so-called revolution, is an economic basket case. It cannot supply even its own needs without massive and costly Soviet subsidies. Like a roving wolf, Castro's Cuba looks to its peace-loving neighbors with hungry eyes and sharp teeth. Our challenge is to avert a crisis before it happens—to help our neighbors build strong economies, democratic governments, and give them weapons to counter Soviet-backed insurgency

Remarks at a White House Ceremony Marking the Observance of National Agriculture Day 
March 20, 1984

And one has to do with a commissar, the Soviet Union, visiting a collective farm, grabbed the first fellow he saw, and he said, "Tell me, comrade, any complaints? .... Oh," he said, "I've never heard anyone complain. No, sir, everything's just fine." "Well," he said, "How are the crops?" He said, "Crops never been better. They're just wonderful." He said, "Potatoes?" He said, "If we could pile the potatoes in one pile, they would reach the foot of God." And the commissar said, "Comrade, this is the Soviet Union. There is no God." He said, "That's all right. There are no potatoes." 


Interview With Midwest Regional Reporters on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
March 20, 1984

What we've been able to do is, by bringing down inflation, reduce the however increasing cost of operation for them. By our PIK program, we, by eliminating a great deal of the surplus, we have increased prices for their products. The other—that surplus hung over them and was an artificial cap on them. We are going to be—the Department of Agriculture is going to be lending some $4.6 billion this year in help to the farmers. We have now eliminated the embargo, opened up foreign trade for them. The new long-term agreement with the Soviets calls for 50 percent more than had been in the agreement.


Toasts of President Reagan and President Francois Mitterrand of France at the State Dinner 
March 22, 1984

Tonight I would like to reemphasize that the United States remains thoroughly committed to the Western alliance and to the defense of Europe. We seek peace and security, and to that end, .America also strives to achieve greater East-West dialog. We will continue to work for a more stable relationship with the Soviet Union—one that will lead to better understanding and a relaxing of existing tensions



Radio Address to the Nation on Central America 
March 24, 1984

Unlike El Salvador, the Nicaraguans don't want international oversight of their campaign and elections. When the members of the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America visited Nicaragua, the Sandinista dictators briefed them with Soviet intelligence and said the U.S. is the source of all evil. 
Nicaragua is a Communist dictatorship armed to the teeth, tied to Cuba and the Soviet Union, which oppresses its people and threatens its neighbors. 
The Bipartisan Commission warned that new Communist regimes could be expected to fall into the same pattern as Nicaragua; namely, expand their armed forces, bring in large numbers of Cuban and Soviet bloc advisers, and increase the repression of their own people and the subversion of their neighbors. And the Commission warned that a rising tide of communism would likely produce refugees, perhaps millions of them, many of whom would flee to the United States
And that brings me to an important point: The people who argue that the root of violence and instability is poverty, not communism, are ignoring the obvious. But all the economic aid in the world won't be worth a dime if Communist guerrillas are determined and have the freedom to terrorize and to burn, bomb, and destroy everything from bridges and industries to power and transportation systems. So, in addition to economic and humanitarian assistance, we must also provide adequate levels of security assistance to permit our friends to protect themselves from Cuban and Soviet supported subversion. 
Military assistance is crucial right now to El Salvador. The Salvadoran people repudiated the guerrillas when they last voted in 1982, but continued Soviet-Cuban-Nicaraguan support for the guerrillas, combined with the failure of our Congress to provide the level of military aid I've requested, have put El Salvador in an extremely vulnerable position. The guerrillas have been seizing the identification cards that allow citizens to vote. One of El Salvador's principal guerrilla commanders has pledged an all-out effort to disrupt the elections. And, should there be a need for an election runoff in late April or May, these same guerrillas, who have already assassinated elected congressmen in El Salvador, will do everything they can to disrupt that election as well


Remarks at the National Legislative Conference of the Independent Insurance Agents of America 
March 27, 1984

You know, there's a story about a Russian and an American that were talking about the relative freedom in their countries. And the Yank proudly stated, "In our country, everyone is free to speak." And the Russian said, "That's true in the Soviet Union as well; the only difference is, after you speak, you're still free." 

But let's not kid ourselves, national security has a price tag. It's an expensive proposition, and it's been made even more so because we've been playing catchup-making up for the irresponsibility of the past. The ones you hear yelling the loudest these days are the ones who put us behind the eight ball in the first place. Many of them publicly oppose the modernization of our strategic systems, while at the same time loudly proclaiming their intent to negotiate arms control agreements with the Soviet Union. Well, it's about time to get serious and ask these would-be leaders what they expect to use as incentives with the Soviet Union. Good will and sincerity will get them a smile and a glass of vodka- [laughter] —and you can guess why the Soviets will be smiling. 
We had two treaties—the SALT treaties-the SALT Treaty I, SALT Treaty II. And SALT Treaty II was not ratified by the Senate, I'm pleased to say. No one has paid any attention to the fact that under those two treaties—the Soviet Union under SALT I, from that time on, added 7,950 nuclear warheads to its arsenal, and 3,850 of those were added after everyone signed SALT II. 
Our administration has proposed a modest investment promoting economic growth and the development of democratic institutions in Central America, as well as providing our friends the means to protect themselves against the attack of Soviet-backed insurgents. Being in the business you're in, I hope you can appreciate what we're asking the Congress to approve: Our program is an insurance policy to protect against the chaos that would result from allowing anti-American Marxists to shoot their way to power in Central America. We must notpermit that to happen

Interview With Steven R. Weisman and Francis X. Clines of the New York Times on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
March 28, 1984

The President. We are in conversations with the Soviet Union on a number of things of this kind. And on things like-we'll soon be talking about a chemical warfare treaty—and with regard to their position, I think the tensions are, frankly, more evident in rhetoric than they are in actuality. I think that there is less tension today and less threat and danger with the rebuilding that we have done that makes us more secure than there was earlier when our defenses were so lax that there was a window of vulnerability. 
No, we—and they have agreed now to come back into negotiations on one of the three treaties that they walked out on, the conventional weapons treaty, the multiple balanced force [mutual and balanced force reductions] MBFR treaty. We're hopeful that they will come back in the others. 
We've made it plain that we're flexible, that while we have made a proposal, we have evidenced our willingness to negotiate in what may be differing views of theirs. An example of that in the intermediate-range weapons in Europe: My first proposal was-and I think it was a commonsense proposal-and that was zero on both sides, eliminate them all, and that type of weapon. Well, the Soviets would not hear of that. 
We said all right, then, granted that would be our goal—and we think it's a good goal—but we're willing, then, to talk whatever reduction in numbers that we can make that will be verifiable, that will be fair and even for both sides. And that still remains on the table. 
The President. No, what we're saying is we're not going to sit here and negotiate with ourselves and while they sit out there not participating—

The President. —waiting to see what we'll finally come up with. That would be very poor negotiating strategy. We have said to them, we're flexible. We're willing to negotiate fair and verifiable agreements when they're ready to come back to the table. 
The President. Oh, I don't think someone could rule that out. I'm not going to make the charge, but I'm not going to also guess at what might be their—part of their problems might simply be with the change now in leadership, that they're in a period of putting their shop together. 
The President. Well the Vice President had an opportunity to meet with him when he was there. And, as I say, there is communication between our two governments, and we remain optimistic that we can arrive at agreements. In the first place, we want them, and they need them.


The President's News Conference
April 4, 1984
The Soviet Union's extensive arsenal of chemical weapons threatens U.S. forces. It requires the United States to maintain a limited retaliatory capability of its own until we achieve an effective ban. We must be able to deter a chemical attack against us or our allies. And without a modern and credible deterrent, the prospects for achieving a comprehensive ban would be nil. 
We're working closely with our NATO allies to try to make progress in all these areas. I can't report these promising developments, however, without expressing my deep, personal regret that the Soviet Union still has not returned to the two negotiations on nuclear arms reductions—the START and the INF talks which it walked away from late last year. 
The United States and many other countries have urged repeatedly that the Soviets return to these talks. So far, they've ignored the will of the world. I hope that the Soviet leadership will respond to our new initiatives, not only by negotiating seriously on chemical weapons but also by joining us in the urgent task of achieving real reductions in nuclear arms.
With regard to the space weapons, this is a situation in which the Soviet Union is ahead of us and already has—and has in place—such a weapon. We are still in the stage of studying such a thing. The great problem that we have—and we're very willing to enter into a treaty with regard to outlawing such weapons, except that it so far seems almost impossible to verify such a weapon, if not actually impossible. And if that's true, then we, again, must have a deterrent. 
The President. Well, in both of them we're trying, but we, as we say, we have to face the reality that before you can place any confidence in such a treaty, you must be confident that you have the one thing that the Soviets have been the most reluctant to give in any treaties that we've ever had, or that we have with them, and that is verification procedures
The President. Well, I don't think the accusation would stand up if they said that. The situation is that we haven't produced any such weapons for 15 years. The Soviet Union has a massive arsenal and is ahead of us in many areas having to do with chemical warfare

The President. I think it's spring in Russia as well as in the United States, and that's when you have war games and maneuvers. We've been having some of our own. We always tell them when we're going to have them; we wish they'd tell us. 
But I think this is nothing more than that. Your war games are actually—whoever's conducting them—based on your own thoughts as to what contingencies could arise that would find you in an emergency situation, and so you set out to train or practice for that. 
Some 40 ships, I know, sounds like an awful lot, but when you stop to think that we're talking about a navy of almost 1,000 ships, it kind of comes down in size a little bit. 
No, I think these are regular and routine maneuvers that usually begin in the spring of the year for most of us. 
The President. No, I really don't. Nor are we trying to send them a signal with our own war games


Remarks at the National Leadership Forum of the Center for International and Strategic Studies of Georgetown University 
April 6, 1984

When we took office in 1981, the Soviet Union had been engaged for 20 years in the most massive military buildup in history. Clearly, their goal was not to catch us, but to surpass us. Yet the United States remained a virtual spectator in the 1970's, a decade of neglect that took a severe toll on our defense capabilities.

Renewed strength at home has been accompanied by closer partnerships with America's friends and allies. Far from buckling under Soviet intimidation, the unity of the NATO alliance has held firm, and we're moving forward to modernize our strategic deterrent. The leader of America's oldest ally, French President Francois Mitterrand, recently reminded us that peace, like liberty, is never given. The pursuit of both is a continual one. In the turbulent times we live in, solidarity among friends is essential. 
Our principles don't involve just rebuilding our strength; they also tell us how to use it. We remain true to the principle of nonaggression. On an occasion when the United States, at the request of its neighbors, did use force in Grenada, we acted decisively, but only after it was clear a bloodthirsty regime had put American and Grenadian lives in danger, and the security of neighboring islands in danger. As soon as stability and freedom were restored in the island, we left. The Soviet Union had no such legitimate justification for its massive invasion of Afghanistan 4 years ago. And today, over a hundred thousand occupation troops remain there. The United States, by stark contrast, occupies no foreign nation, nor do we seek to. 
Though we and the Soviet Union differ markedly, living in this nuclear age makes it imperative that we talk with each other. If the new Soviet leadership truly is devoted to building a safer and more humane world, rather than expanding armed conquests, it will find a sympathetic partner in the West.
Challenge number one is to reduce the risk of nuclear war and to reduce the levels of nuclear armaments in a way that also reduces the risk they will ever be used. We have no higher challenge, for a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought. But merely to be against nuclear war is not enough to prevent it. 
For 35 years the defense policy of the United States and her NATO allies has been based on one simple premise: We do not start wars; we maintain our conventional and strategic strength to deter aggression by convincing any potential aggressor that war could bring no benefit, only disaster. Deterrence has been and will remain the cornerstone of our national security policy to defend freedom and preserve peace. 
But as I mentioned, the 1970's were marked by neglect of our defenses, and nuclear safety was no exception. Too many forgot John Kennedy's warning that only when our arms are certain beyond doubt can we be certain beyond doubt they will never be used. By the beginning of this decade, we face three growing problems: the Soviet SS-20 monopoly in Europe and Asia; the vulnerability of our land-based ICBM, the entire force; and the failure of arms control agreements to slow the overall growth in strategic weapons. The Carter administration acknowledged these problems. In fact, almost everyone did. 
There is a widespread, but mistaken, impression that arms agreements automatically produce arms control. In 1969, when SALT I negotiations began, the Soviet Union had about 1,500 strategic nuclear weapons. Today the Soviet nuclear arsenal can grow to over 15,000 nuclear weapons and still stay within all past arms control agreements, including the SALT I and SALT II guidelines. 
The practical means for reducing the risks of nuclear war must, therefore, follow two parallel paths—credible deterrence and real arms reductions with effective verification. It is on this basis that we've responded to the problems I just described. This is why we've moved forward to implement NATO's dual-track decision of 1979. While actually reducing the number of nuclear weapons in Europe, it is also why we have sought bipartisan support for the recommendations of the Scowcroft commission and the builddown concept and why we've proposed deep reductions in strategic forces at the strategic arms reduction talks. 
Without exception, every arms control proposal that we have offered would reverse the arms buildup and help bring a more stable balance at lower force levels. At the START talks, we seek to reduce substantially the number of ballistic missile warheads, reduce the destructive capacity of nuclear missiles, and establish limits on bombers and cruise missiles, below the levels of SALT II. At the talks on intermediate-range nuclear forces, our negotiators have tabled four initiatives to address Soviet concerns and improve prospects for a fair and equitable agreement that would reduce or eliminate an entire class of such nuclear weapons. Our flexibility in the START and INF negotiations has been demonstrated by numerous modifications to our positions. But they have been met only by the silence of Soviet walkouts. 
At the mutual and balanced force reduction talks in Vienna, we and our NATO partners presented a treaty that would reduce conventional forces to parity at lower levels. To reduce the risks of war in time of crisis, we have proposed to the Soviet Union important measures to improve direct communications and increase mutual confidence. And just recently, I directed Vice President Bush to go to the Conference [Committee] on Disarmament in Geneva to present a new American initiative, a worldwide ban on the production, possession, and use of chemical weapons.
Those who wanted a last-minute moratorium on INF deployment would have betrayed our allies and reduced the chances for a safer Europe. Those who would try to implement a unilateral freeze would find it unverifiable and destabilizing, because it would prevent restoration of a stable balance that keeps the peace. And those who would advocate unilateral cancellation of the Peacekeeper missile would ignore a central recommendation of the bipartisan Scowcroft report and leave the Soviets with little incentive to negotiate meaningful reductions. Indeed, the Soviets would be rewarded for leaving the bargaining table. 
Regional tensions often begin in longstanding social, political, and economic inequities and in ethnic and religious disputes. But throughout the 1970's, increased Soviet support for terrorism, insurgency, and aggression coupled with the perception of weakening U.S. power and resolve greatly exacerbated these tensions. 
The results were not surprising: the massacres of Kampuchea followed by the Vietnamese invasion, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the rise of Iranian extremism and the holding of Americans hostage, Libyan coercion in Africa, Soviet and Cuban military involvement in Angola and Ethiopia, their subversion in Central America, and the rise of state-supported terrorism
welcome a debate, but if it's to be productive, we must put aside mythology and uninformed rhetoric. Some, for example, insist that the root of regional violence is poverty, but not communism. Well, threefourths of our requests and of our current program is economic and humanitarian assistance. America is a good and generous nation, but economic aid alone cannot stop Cuban- and Soviet-inspired guerrillas determined to terrorize, burn, bomb, and destroy everything from bridges and industries to electric power and transportation. And neither individual rights nor economic health can be advanced if stability is not secured
In Central America we've also seen progress. El Salvador's Presidential election expresses that nation's desire to govern itself in peace. Yet the future of the region remains open. We have a choice. Either we help America's friends defend themselves and give democracy a chance, or we abandon our responsibilities and let the Soviet Union and Cuba shape the destiny of our hemisphere. If this happens, the East-West conflict will only become broader and much more dangerous


Radio Address to the Nation on United States Foreign Policy 
April 7, 1984

Does the new Soviet leadership truly want to reach agreements that can make the world safer? Well, they'll never convince the world they're sincere with harsh rhetoric and walk-outs. We do know they respect strength. And in time, we should expect that they will return to the negotiating table where all of us hope and pray that a safer world can be secured. 
Our second challenge, peacemaking in troubled regions, has demanded a new direction. We're trying to bring all our strengths to bear. Economic aid alone won't stop Soviet-sponsored guerrillas, and individual rights aren't secure without peace. We need all the tools we have—diplomatic mediation, economic help, security assistance, and promotion of democratic reforms—to address complex regional problems. The recent Presidential elections in El Salvador probably couldn't have been held if we'd followed any other approach. And for democracy to have a chance in the future, the Congress must pass the plan we've proposed, which follows the recommendations made by the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America



Radio Address to the Nation on Central America 
April 14, 1984

Much has been made of late regarding our proper role in Central America and, in particular, toward Nicaragua. Unfortunately, much of the debate has ignored the most relevant facts. Central America has become the stage for a bold attempt by the Soviet Union, Cuba, and Nicaragua to install communism, by force, throughout this hemisphere. 
The struggling democracies of Costa Rica, Honduras, and El Salvador are being threatened by a Soviet bloc and Cuban-supported Sandinista army and security force in Nicaragua that has grown from about 10,000 under the previous government to more than 100,000 in less than 5 years. 
Last year alone, the Soviet bloc delivered over $100 million in military hardware. The Sandinistas have established a powerful force of artillery, multiple-rocket launchers, and tanks in an arsenal that exceeds that of all the other countries in the region put together. 
More than 40 new military bases and support facilities have been constructed in Nicaragua—all with Soviet bloc and Cuban support—and an investment of over $300 million. In addition to money and guns, there are now more than 2,500 Cuban and Soviet military personnel in Nicaragua, another 5,000 so-called civilian advisers, as well as PLO, East bloc [East German], and Libyan assistance to the Sandinistas
We've maintained a consistent policy toward the Sandinista regime, hoping they can be brought back from the brink peacefully through negotiations. We're working through the Contadora process for a verifiable multilateral agreement, one that ensures the Sandinistas terminate their export of subversion, reduce the size of their military forces, implement their democratic commitments to the Organization of American States, and remove Soviet bloc and Cuban military personnel. 
What I've said today is not pleasant to hear, but it's important that you know Central America is vital to our interests and to our security. It not only contains the Panama Canal, it sits astride some of the most important sea lanes in the world—see lanes in which a Soviet-Cuban naval force held combat maneuvers just this week.


Remarks to Reporters on the Vice President's Trip to Geneva, Switzerland, To Present the United States Initiative for a Ban on Chemical Weapons
April 16, 1984

That's what our treaty proposal is designed to do. We've worked long and hard to develop it, and we think it's a first-rate proposal. Of course, there will be hard negotiations ahead, but we're ready to work side by side with the representatives of the Soviet Union and other countries to achieve the goal of an effective ban on chemical weapons. And we hope that once they've seen the full treaty proposal, the Soviet Union and others will respond seriously and negotiate in good faith


Remarks at a White House Luncheon for the National Hispanic Leadership Conference 
April 17, 1984

A rising economy and greater opportunities give us confidence, but America doesn't exist in a vacuum. Today, a faraway totalitarian power is committing enormous resources to change the strategic balance of the world by turning Central America into a string of anti-American, Soviet-style dictatorships. And when I use the term anti-American, I'm not using it "anti-United States," because we're all Americans—from Tierra del Fuego in the south to the North Pole. And it is all of America that this assault is aimed at. 
Nicaragua, with the full support of its Cuban and Soviet allies, is arming, supplying, and directing an insurgency operation in El Salvador. If they succeed, it will set the course for the rest of Central America.


Remarks to Chinese Community Leaders in Beijing, China 
April 27, 1984

I think our two peoples agree there can be only one sane policy to preserve our precious civilization in this modern nuclear age: A nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought. And that's why we've proposed to the Soviet Union meaningful negotiations that go beyond rhetoric to actual arms reductions and why we must all work for the day when nuclear weapons will be banished from the face of the Earth


Remarks at a Reception for Members of the American Community in Beijing, China 
April 28, 1984

So, he wrote back to say he had broken the code. He said Grenada does produce more nutmeg than any other spot on Earth. The Soviets and the Cubans are trying to take Grenada. He said, "You can't have good eggnog without nutmeg." [Laughter] And he said, "You can't have Christmas without eggnog. So, the Soviets and the Cubans were out to steal Christmas." [Laughter] And his sixth and final point was, he said, "We stopped them." 


Radio Address to the Nation on the Trip to China 
April 28, 1984

Today China's efforts to modernize, foster the spirit of enterprise, open its doors to the West, and expand areas of mutual cooperation while opposing Soviet aggression make it a nation of increasing importance to America and to prospects for peace and prosperity in the Pacific



Remarks Upon Returning From China 
May 1, 1984

It's been a fascinating and rewarding 10 days, and now our long journey is nearly over. I was interested to read one report on whether the meetings were a success or not this morning. It seems that TASS, the Russian news agency, says that I was a failure at trying to eat a pigeon egg with my chopsticks. [Laughter] And as usual, TASS was wrong. [Laughter] It wasn't a pigeon egg; it was a quail egg. And I got it on the second stab


Remarks at a Luncheon With Community Leaders in Fairbanks, Alaska 
May 1, 1984

In the international arena, we face great challenges. We're trying to restore a balance of military power, making up for more than a decade of almost constant neglect of the defense needs of our country. We would rather negotiate agreements with the Soviets than build new weapons, but we cannotnegotiate with empty chairs when the Soviets walkaway, as they have, from the bargaining table. 
In Central America, our friends are not only struggling for democracy; they're battling for their lives against a Soviet-sponsored Nicaraguan power play. Our nation cannot afford to permit Soviet-sponsored guerrillas to shoot their way into power and turn Central America into a string of Marxist-Leninist dictatorships


Remarks at a White House Luncheon Commemorating the Centennial of the Birth of Harry S. Truman 
May 8, 1984

Now, may I say one more thing from my heart. I have lauded Harry Truman for his profound resolve to stop Communist expansionism and for trying to protect the freedom of the West. May I say that in this effort, he received the essential support of a Congress that understood that freedom is notnegotiable. And the only response to expansionism is bipartisan agreement to stop it. And in those days, Democrats and Republicans alike were united in their opposition to tyranny. And seeing this unity, the Soviet Union was forced to back down


Remarks on Presenting the Small Business Person of the Year Award
May 9, 1984

But one of the great cornerstones of our way of life is our right to openly and critically discuss the policies of government. And there's a story about a Russian and an American who were talking about the freedoms in their countries; and the American said, "Listen, in America," he said, "I can stand on any street corner or out in the park or anyplace I want and openly criticize the President of the United States." And the Russian said, "We have that same privilege in the Soviet Union." And the American was pretty surprised. He says, "I can stand on any street corner in any park in Russia, and I can openly criticize the President of the United States." 


Informal Exchange With Reporters on Soviet Withdrawal From the 1984 Summer Olympic Games 
May 9, 1984

The President. Well, now, I'm not supposed to answer any questions here in the press photo opportunity, but I think I can't let that go by without saying that, like so many, I have a great feeling of disappointment. I'm sorry that they feel that way, and I think it's unfair to the young people that have been waiting for so long to participate in those games. 
And it ought to be remembered by all of us that the games more than 2,000 years ago started as a means of bringing peace between the Greek city-states. And in those days, even if a war was going on, when Olympic year came, they called off the war in order to hold the games. I wish we were still as civilized


Address to the Nation on United States Policy in Central America 
May 9, 1984

Our diplomatic objectives will not be attained by good will and noble aspirations alone. In the last 15 years, the growth of Soviet military power has meant a radical change in the nature of the world we live in. Now, this does not mean, as some would have us believe, that we're in imminent danger of nuclear war. We're not. As long as we maintain the strategic balance and make it more stable by reducing the level of weapons on both sides, then we can count on the basic prudence of the Soviet leaders to avoid that kind of challenge to us. 
They are presently challenging us with a different kind of weapon: subversion and the use of surrogate forces, Cubans, for example. We've seen it intensifying during the last 10 years, as the Soviet Union and its surrogates move to establish control over Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Angola, Ethiopia, South Yemen, Afghanistan, and recently, closer to home, in Nicaragua and now El Salvador. It's the fate of this region, Central America, that I want to talk to you about tonight. 
The issue is our effort to promote democracy and economic well-being in the face of Cuban and Nicaraguan aggression, aided and abetted by the Soviet Union. It is definitely not about plans to send American troops into combat in Central America. Each year, the Soviet Union provides Cuba with $4 billion in assistance, and it sends tons of weapons to foment revolution here in our hemisphere. 
The defense policy of the United States is based on a simple premise: We do not start wars. We will never be the aggressor. We maintain our strength in order to deter and defend against aggression, to preserve freedom and peace. We help our friends defend themselves. 
Central America is a region of great importance to the United States. And it is so close: San Salvador is closer to Houston, Texas, than Houston is to Washington, DC. Central America is America. It's at our doorstep, and it's become the stage for a bold attempt by the Soviet Union, Cuba, and Nicaragua to install communism by force throughout the hemisphere
As the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America, chaired by Henry Kissinger, agreed, if we do nothing, if we continue to provide too little help, our choice will be a Communist Central America with additional Communist military bases on the mainland of this hemisphere and Communist subversion spreading southward and northward. This Communist subversion poses the threat that a hundred million people from Panama to the open border of our South could come under the control of pro-Soviet regimes.

The Sandinistas, who rule Nicaragua, are Communists whose relationship and ties to Fidel Castro of Cuba go back a quarter of a century. A number of the Sandinistas were trained in camps supported by Cuba, the Soviet bloc, and the PLO. It is important to note that Cuba, the Sandinistas, the Salvadoran Communist guerrillas, and the PLO have all worked together for many years. In 1978 the Sandinistas and elements of the PLO joined in a "declaration of war" against Israel

Shortly after taking power, the Sandinistas, in partnership with Cuba and the Soviet Union, began supporting aggression and terrorism against El Salvador, Honduras, Costa Rica, and Guatemala. They opened training camps for guerrillas from El Salvador so they could return to their country and attack its government. Those camps still operate. Nicaragua is still the headquarters for Communist guerrilla movements. And Nicaraguan agents and diplomats have been caught in Costa Rica and Honduras supervising attacks carried out by Communist terrorists. 
The role that Cuba has long performed for the Soviet Union is now also being played by the Sandinistas. They have become Cuba's Cubans. Weapons, supplies, and funds are shipped from the Soviet bloc to Cuba, from Cuba to Nicaragua, from Nicaragua to the Salvadoran guerrillas. These facts were confirmed last year by the House Intelligence Committee. 
Just last week a Soviet ship began unloading heavy-duty military trucks in Nicaragua's Corinto Harbor. Another Soviet ship is on its way with more trucks and 155 Soviet jeeps.
Nicaragua's own military forces have grown enormously. Since 1979 their trained forces have increased from 10,000 to over 100,000. Why does Nicaragua need all this power? Why did this country of only 2.8 million build this large military force? 
We're in the midst of what President John F. Kennedy called "a long twilight struggle" to defend freedom in the world. He understood the problem of Central America. He understood Castro. And he understood the long-term goals of the Soviet Union in this region

If the Communists can start war against the people of El Salvador, then El Salvador and its friends are surely justified in defending themselves by blocking the flow of arms. If the Soviet Union can aid and abet subversion in our hemisphere, then the United States has a legal right and a moral duty to help resist it. This is not only in our strategic interest; it is morally right. It would be profoundly immoral to let peace-loving friends depending on our help be overwhelmed by brute force if we have any capacity to prevent it. 
If our political process pulls together, Soviet- and Cuban-supported aggression can be defeated. On this, the centennial anniversary of President Harry Truman's birth, it's fitting to recall his words, spoken to a Joint Session of the Congress in a similar situation: "The free peoples of the world look to us for support in maintaining their freedoms. If we falter . . . we may endanger the peace of the world, and we shall surely endanger the welfare of this nation." 
The speech was given in 1947. The problem then was 2 years of Soviet-supported indirect aggression against Greece. The Communists were close to victory. President Truman called on the Congress to provide decisive aid to the Greek Government. Both parties rallied behind President Truman's call. Democratic forces succeeded, and Greece became a parliamentary democracy
Let's remember the Soviet bloc gave Cuba and Nicaragua $4.9 billion in assistance last year, while the United States provided all its friends throughout all of Central America with only a fraction of that amount.



Remarks at the Midyear Meeting of the National Association of Realtors
May 10, 1984

Recently, I accepted a compromise in reducing defense spending. I did this reluctantly and in good faith that substantial cuts in other areas will be made. Those pushing for further defense cuts are rolling dice with the security needs of this country and, at the same time, undercutting any chance for tangible arms reduction agreements with the Soviets


Remarks at the Annual Senate-House Fund-raising Dinner 
May 10, 1984

At the same time, we've begun rebuilding our defenses and given our foreign policy a new sense of direction. In Grenada, we set a nation free. In Europe, we and our NATO allies went through months of Soviet bluff and bluster and came out of it more firmly united than ever. 
In Central America, our administration has firmly supported the forces of democracy and economic progress. Three out of four American dollars—or of dollars of American aid to that region have not been military, but economic. And as I said last night on TV, the United States must notallow the free governments of this vitally important region to be overrun by Soviet- and Cuban-backed guerrillas

Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
May 14, 1984

There is no more compelling priority on my agenda, and that is why we've been working so hard to convince the Soviet Union to join us in a spirit of genuine cooperation to achieve real and equitable reductions in the levels of nuclear arms. And that's why the United States is continuing to carry out its own obligations and commitments under previous agreements as we callupon the Soviet Union to demonstrate equal restraint. 
In five rounds of START, the United States has been flexible in exploring all avenues to achieve verifiable arms reductions. The U.S.. position was adjusted to reflect the Scowcroft Commission's recommendations to incorporate a proposed mutual guaranteed build-down, and to include trade-offs between the interests and advantages of each side. Negotiations on mutual balanced force reductions resumed March 16th. We tabled a new initiative to break the deadlock with the Soviets over existing force levels. And in the Conference on Disarmament, we're pressing for a total ban on chemical weapons. 
Despite all our initiatives, the Soviet Union walked out of the Intermediate Nuclear Force talks and has still failed to agree to resume the START talks. We regret this Soviet action, and we remain prepared to resume negotiations immediately, without preconditions. We must not cast doubt on U.S.. and allied reserve [resolve] nor reward the Soviets for their current belligerent behavior towards arms control. 
In the early 1970's, the United States expected to field a modernized ICBM system by the end of the seventies. We didn't make it. The Peacekeeper will not be deployed, in even limited numbers, until late 1986. The Soviet Union, however, deployed over 800 SS-17's, SS-18's, and SS-19's, missiles that are similar to or even larger than the MX. Also, the Soviet Union is now flight-testing two new ICBM's—the MIRVed SS-X24 and the SS-X25—and have others under development. 
The U.S.S.R. has a comprehensive program to strengthen their strategic force. We cannot afford to delay any longer. Without Peacekeeper, the MX, the incentive for the Soviets to return to the negotiating table is greatly reduced. The Soviets hope that, once again, our modernization efforts will be curtailed. To falter now would only encourage the Soviet Union to ignore our arms control efforts. For our own security and the cause of world peace, we must support the bipartisan national program that we approved last year.
Yeah, Bill [Bill Plante, CBS News]. 
The President. What did I actually talk about over in China? I have thought back on the remarks that were supposedly—or were censored out or at least, removed. What I said about them was I was contrasting what we have—we obviously differ in many ways from the Chinese, but I was saying we have many things in common. And I pointed out that on our own behalf, we didn't have any troops massed on their border. We were not pursuing an expansionist policy. We were not invading another country, such as Afghanistan or doing what they're doing in Kampuchea. Now, is that harsh rhetoric, or is that telling the simple truth? 
The President. Well, Helen [Helen Thomas, United Press International], sometimes I wonder why we don't ask those questions of them. Why is it that it's almost a pattern that the United States is possibly doing something that might cause the threat of war or that—what should we—we didn't walkaway from the table. In fact, we made some efforts to bring them back to the table by showing them how flexible we were willing to be in these discussions. And they didn't come back. It was my—there were people who said that my rhetoric wasn't harsh enough after they shot down a civilian airliner with 269 innocent people aboard. 
The President. Again, you'd have to ask them. The reasons they have given are absolutely false—and we've been able to prove it—the reasons that there might not be sufficient security for their visitors, their athletes, and so forth. And we were able to prove no one in the history of the Olympics has ever done as much as we're doing to ensure that. 
The President. Well, let's remember the different situation. The Soviets have now announced that they are not going to come because they don't believe that we can offer protection to their athletes. And, as I say, we have been given—we've given them chapter and verse on what we have done, and there had never been anything like it. 
Now, in 1980, the reason for the boycott that was given by the then administration was because the Soviets had invaded-openly invaded with their own forces—a neighboring country, Afghanistan, that hadn't done any thing to them or lifted a finger against them. 
The President. I don't think there's any action that I could take that would be prudent. I would—naturally, I would do anything if I thought it could have a result, and I have encouraged citizens groups and our people to do this. It is not a government relation problem. 
The President. I don't know. You'd have to ask them about that. But, Sam [Sam Donaldson, ABC News], I have to tell you—a little thing with you. The other day, I had in my possession a kind of a scholarly type magazine—I can't even give you the name of it now—that had been given to me, dated April 1980. And on the plane over in China, I gave it to George Shultz, because I thought he would be interested. It was one of those where there are a whole series of essays in the magazine on various national and international topics. And I gave it to him, because one of the essays was on Soviet-American relations. 
And there hasn't been an adjective used or a word spoken with regard to our relations now that I did not see in that article-where the relations were at the lowest ebb they had ever been. They were frozen tight, and the President—the then President of the United States, according to the essay, was to blame for this terrible relationship. 
What have we done to the Soviets that can compare with any of the things that they are presently doing except tell them that we're not going to let them get so powerful that they can impose nuclear blackmail on us and that we are willing to meet them in arms reductions to the point of total disarmament, if they would be willing to meet in that? 
The President. I don't know how to assess that. I don't know. It might. 

Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Miguel De la Madrid Hurtado of Mexico 
May 15, 1984

Complicating the situation and making it even more dangerous has been the intervention of a totalitarian coalition which has undermined what we had hoped would be a democratic revolution. These totalitarians have been pouring gasoline onto the fire by pumping massive supplies of weapons into Central America and encouraging tyranny and aggression. Thousands of Cubans and Soviet-bloc military personnel have accompanied this flow of weapons and equipment into the region.





