MID 205201, US v China, 18 dec 50 to 17-Jan-51 to 16-Oct-52




318 - The President's News Conference
December 28, 1950

THE PRESIDENT. I can't comment on that at this time. I'm sorry



2 - The President's News Conference
January 4, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I have that--do not have that under consideration



4 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 8, 1951

If their efforts are successful, they foment a revolution, as they did in Czechoslovakia and China, and as they tried, unsuccessfully, to do in Greece. If their methods of subversion are blocked, and if they think they can get away with outright warfare, they resort to external aggression. This is what they did when they loosed the armies of their puppet states against the Republic of Korea, in an evil war by proxy

Our country has always stood for freedom for the peoples of Asia. Long, long ago it stood for the freedom of the peoples of Asia. Our history shows this. We have demonstrated it in the Philippines. We have demonstrated it in our relations with Indonesia, India, and with China. We hope to join in restoring the people of Japan to membership in the community of free nations


7 - The President's News Conference
January 11, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. You are talking about bribery now, and I don't have anything to do with that. I don't believe in it. That's what ruined the Chiang Kai-shek government, just that sort of procedure




16 - The President's News Conference
January 18, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. Dean Acheson commented on that completely yesterday, with my entire approval. He covered it thoroughly and completely, after consultation with the President. Be sure and make that plain

THE PRESIDENT. Of course. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Of course--with everything we can bring to bear. 6 
THE PRESIDENT. I can't answer you on that--
THE PRESIDENT. --and I can't comment on it. 




22 - The President's News Conference
January 25, 1951

1.] [Reading] "Ambassador Austin 1 has fully and forcefully presented the views of this Government on our attitude toward aggression by the Chinese Communists. These views have the solid support of the Executive, the Congress, and the people of the United States. 
"Each member of the United Nations must make its own decision on this issue. For my part, I believe in calling an aggressor an aggressor. The question of what can and should be done about the aggression in Korea, of course, must be discussed with all other friendly nations. 
"Obviously this is no time for rash or unwise action. This is a time for clear thinking and firmness. 
"Let me stress again that the American resolution contains--as all our proposals have contained--a method for bringing about a cease-fire, and opening the way for peaceful settlement of outstanding issues." 




41 - Remarks at a Masonic Breakfast.
February 21, 1951

It is a tremendous outlook that we have for the future of the world as a whole, if we can develop the undeveloped parts of the world to meet the pressure of populations in countries like China and India and central Europe



50 - Remarks to the Winners of the 10th Annual Science Talent Search.
March 1, 1951

I was over at Aberdeen the other day, looking at tanks and weapons and guided missiles and all the other things which you hear about. And when I got through I didn't then have any feeling of mystery about why the Chinese have not been able to push us out of Korea, because we have better equipment and better weapons



63 - The President's News Conference
March 29, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. It has, and we are looking into it



70 - The President's News Conference
April 5, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I have no comment on Speaker Rayburn's statement, but the Speaker is a truthful man




78 - Radio Report to the American People on Korea and on U.S. Policy in the Far East.
April 11, 1951

The whole Communist imperialism is back of the attack on peace in the Far East. It was the Soviet Union that trained and equipped the North Koreans for aggression. The Chinese Communists massed 44 well-trained and well-equipped divisions on the Korean frontier. These were the troops they threw into battle when the North Korean Communists were beaten

But you may ask why can't we take other steps to punish the aggressor. Why don't we bomb Manchuria and China itself? Why don't we assist the Chinese Nationalist troops to land on the mainland of China ? 
If we were to do these things we would be running a very grave risk of starting a general war. If that were to happen, we would have brought about the exact situation we are trying to prevent. 
If we were to do these things, we would become entangled in a vast conflict on the continent of Asia and our task would become immeasurably more difficult all over the world. 
What would suit the ambitions of the Kremlin better than for our military forces to be committed to a full-scale war with Red China? 
It may well be that, in spite of our best efforts, the Communists may spread the war. But it would be wrong--tragically wrong-for us to take the initiative in extending the war. 
The dangers are great. Make no mistake about it. Behind the North Koreans and Chinese Communists in the front lines stand additional millions of Chinese soldiers. And behind the Chinese stand the tanks, the planes, the submarines, the soldiers, and the scheming rulers of the Soviet Union. 
Our aim is to avoid the spread of the conflict. 
The course we have been following is the one best calculated to avoid an all-out war. It is the course consistent with our obligation to do all we can to maintain international peace and security. Our experience in Greece and Berlin shows that it is the most effective course of action we can follow. 
First of all, it is clear that our efforts in Korea can blunt the will of the Chinese Communists to continue the struggle. The United Nations forces have put up a tremendous fight in Korea and have inflicted very heavy casualties on the enemy. Our forces are stronger now than they have been before. These are plain facts which may discourage the Chinese Communists from continuing their attack.




80 - Address at the Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner.
April 14, 1951

If the Communist leaders have learned the lesson that aggression will not be tolerated by the free nations of the world, it should be possible to reach a peaceful settlement in Korea. But it must be settled on a basis that will protect the objectives for which the United Nations are fighting. 
To reach such a settlement the Soviet and Chinese Communist leaders must abandon their aggression. 
On that point there can be no compromise. 
We will not engage in appeasement. 
We will make no deals that would reward aggression
They want us to get out of Korea--but they urge us to wage an aggressive war against China. Now, beat that one, if you can! 
They say it will provoke Russia to attack if we send troops to Europe--but they are sure Russia won't be provoked if we carry the war to China. It has been categorically stated that Russia will not come in if we bomb Manchuria. The statement was made to me about the Chinese not coming into Korea, and it was made on good authority, too, and I believed it




95 - The President's News Conference
May 3, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I think everybody was not exactly surprised; they were sorry to see it happen





96 - Address at a Dinner of the Civil Defense Conference.
May 7, 1951

The firm stand of the United Nations in Korea has checked the advance of the Communist imperialism throughout Asia. It is using up the military resources of the Chinese Communists to such an extent that they are not able to carry out the designs of Communist imperialism against the independence of other Asian countries. And the people of those countries who have been resisting Communist aggression have now been given new hope and new courage

The Chinese rulers are losing large numbers of their soldiers. As these losses increase, it will become clearer and clearer to them that aggression does not pay. They can have peace when they give up their aggression and stop the fighting



107 - Address at the National Conference on Citizenship.
May 17, 1951

The suggestion was made by one Senator the other day, that we ought to cut down the goal for our Armed Forces by half a million men. And this same Senator wants to go for an all-out war in China all by ourselves. At a time like this, such a cut would be foolish--not only foolish it would be most dangerous



108 - The President's News Conference
May 17, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. My mind was made up at the time of the ultimatum to the Chinese Communist commander

THE PRESIDENT. I said my mind was made up when the ultimatum was sent by General MacArthur to the Chinese commander

THE PRESIDENT. I can't comment on that now




109 - Remarks at the Armed Forces Day Dinner.
May 18, 1951

When the North Koreans and Chinese began their aggressive attacks and marched into South Korea, a republic which had been set up by the United Nations and under their aegis, it was necessary that the peace-loving nations of the world enforce that peace, and stop the aggression



135 - Address at the Dedication of the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center.
June 22, 1951

Public health research workers right here at Bethesda developed a vaccine against typhus. Their vaccine has kept our forces in Korea free from typhus, while the North Korean and Chinese Communists have suffered seriously from that disease



144 - Address at the Ceremonies Commemorating the 175th Anniversary of the Declaration of Independence.
July 4, 1951

It is much the same with Korea. We are not fighting there to conquer China, or to destroy the Soviet Empire. We are fighting for a simple aim--as important to us today as the goal of independence was in 1776-the aim of securing theright of nations to be free and to live in peace



174 - Address in Detroit at the Celebration of the City's 250th Anniversary.
July 28, 1951

In the Far East the situation is much the same. The North Koreans and the Chinese Communists--so-called volunteers--are getting a steady flow of new equipment from the Soviet Union for ground and air use



213 - Radio Address Opening the Defense Bond Drive.
September 3, 1951

When aggression came in Korea, the United Nations took action. It labeled the aggression for what it was, it branded the North Korean and the Chinese Communists as the aggressors. It called upon peace-loving countries to unite and put down aggression




295 - The President's News Conference at Key West
November 15, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I think it is a horrible thing. I have no official facts on the subject as yet, but I suppose they will come up to me eventually. But I think it is a horrible thing. It's the most uncivilized thing that has happened in the last century, if it's true



5 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 9, 1952

In Korea the forces of the United Nations turned hack the Chinese Communist invasion-and did it without widening the area of conflict. The action of the United Nations in Korea has been a powerful deterrent to a third world war. However, the situation in Korea remains very hazardous. The outcome of the armistice negotiation still remains uncertain



54 - Address Broadcast from the Voice of America floating Radio Transmitter Courier.
March 4, 1952

for almost two centuries the people of the United States have lived at peace with the peoples of Russia and China and other countries whose rulers are now assailing us. Only a decade ago, when the peoples of Russia and China were suffering under two of the most savage invasions in history, we came to their aid. We helped them to save their countries. 
I want to say to these people today, as we said then: We are your friends. There are no differences between us that cannot be settled if your rulers will turn from their senseless policy of hate and terror, and follow the principles of peace. 
Today the aggressive policies of your rulers are forcing us to arm to defend ourselves. But we cannot find it in our hearts to hate anyone. We cannot find it in our hearts to bear any hate against you. We know that you are suffering under oppression and persecution. We know that if you were free to say what you really believe, you would join with us to banish the fear of war, and bring peace on earth and good will towards all men




57 - Radio and Television Address to the American People on the Mutual Security Program.
March 6, 1952

Now let us look for a minute at India. Since the shadow of Communist control has darkened China, India stands as the largest democratic nation in all Asia. But India is faced with the same kind of threat which overpowered the Chinese. We have a chance to help stop that threat in India. Not by sending guns and planes, but by doing just the kind of thing I've been telling you about



69 - Address at the Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner.
March 29, 1952

That's the record, and how do the Republicans propose to get around it? Here's what they will try to do. They will go to the voters and say, "Did you know the Government was full of Communists?" And the voters say, "No. What makes you say that?" And then the Republicans explain that somebody named Joe Doakes works for the Government, and he has a cousin who sells shoelaces, or a ribbon clerk in a department store, and this cousin has a wife who wrote an article, before Joe married her, that was printed in a magazine that also printed an article in favor of Chinese Communists-and they will continue that ad lib. This may sound very silly, and it is. But some political fakers spend all their time trying to pull the wool over the people's eyes with this sort of nonsense



82 - Radio and Television Address to the American People on the Need for Government Operation of the Steel Mills.
April 8, 1952

I have to think about our soldiers in Korea, facing the Chinese Communists, and about our soldiers and allies in Europe, confronted by the military power massed behind the Iron Curtain. I have to think of the danger to our security if we are forced, for lack of steel, to cut down on our atomic energy program



144 - Address at a Dinner of the Jewish National fund.
May 26, 1952

We agreed to help in this program. This year our share was to be about $100 million, but under the bill the House passed last Friday, we probably would not be able to do more than $25 million worth of help. And the people who led the fight--now listen to this, this is good, for these meat axe cuts in Asia are the very same people who howl the loudest about losing China to the Communists-now I wonder, do they want to save India from the fate of China, or would they rather let India be gobbled up by the Communists too, so they can have another calamity to blame on the administration 



266 - Rear Platform and Other Informal Remarks in Minnesota, North Dakota, and Montana.
September 29, 1952

Now these things have been possible in spite of the Old Guard Republicans in the Congress, and not because of them. Their record in Congress shows you where they stand, and what they have done. They haven't helped build prosperity--a lot of them are still voting against the farm programs, against power, against reclamation, against conservation. They have been against every measure that has built up the West. They haven't helped the defense effort. A lot of them have fought against price controls, time after time--and rent controls, and defense housing. They have tried to get tax relief for the rich and all kinds of special benefits for every special interest. Those Old Guard Republicans haven't helped much in Korea, either. Most of them have voted against military aid and economic aid to Korea before the invasion. That is what gave the Communists their signal to advance. Then, later on, they tried to start an all-out war with China. Of course, they were backing a different general then. When he got here, though, they didn't think so much of him as before


