MID 121601, US v China, 1 nov to 1-Dec-65 to 31-Aug-66


6 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 12, 1966

In recent months a number of nations have east out those who would subject them to the ambitions of mainland China. 
History is on the side of freedom and is on the side of societies shaped from the genius of each people. History does not favor a single system or belief--unless force is used to make it so. 
That is why it has been necessary for us to defend this basic principle of our policy, to defend it in Berlin, in Korea, in Cuba-and tonight in Vietnam.


86 - Remarks in New York City Upon Receiving the National Freedom Award
February 23, 1966

Fifth, some ask about the risks of a wider war, perhaps against the vast land armies of Red China. And again the answer is "no," never by any act of ours--and not if there is any reason left behind the wild words from Peking. 
We have threatened no one, and we will not. 
We seek the end of no regime, and we will not. 
Our purpose is solely to defend against aggression. To any armed attack, we will reply. We have measured the strength and the weakness of others, and we think we know our own. We observe in ourselves, and we applaud in others, a careful restraint in action. We can live with anger in word as long as it is matched by caution in deed



128 - Remarks at the Signing of the Supplemental Military Authorization Bill.
March 15, 1966

How sad it is that such great sums must be spent for the bombs and the planes and the gunpowders of war. How joyous it would be if these great resources could he put, instead, to the service of peace. We have said this and we have repeated it time and time again, and we will never tire of saying it, and I repeat it now: The people of Vietnam, North and South, have the same basic human needs. The people of Asia and the people of China have the same basic human needs


141 - The President's News Conference
March 22, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. I think the Secretary of State covered the administration's position very thoroughly Sunday. If he didn't, the Press Secretary did. If not, I would call to your attention that we have watched with interest and complete understanding the testimony of various committees, those of Mr. Zablocki in the House, and Mr. Fulbright in the Senate,4 and the testimony about that part of the world. We think that it is very good to have the opinion of these professors and experts, and Ambassadors and other people. 
As far as I am aware, it is not the position of this country that creates the problems with China. It is China's own position. We are very anxious to try to have more contact with her and more exchanges with her, but as has been explained by all of these people, she hangs up the phone. Until there is some change on China's part, I doubt that these academic discussions will do much more than satisfy people's yearning for information


158 - The President's News Conference
March 31, 1966

Secretary Rusk took them on a trip around the world. He discussed the African Continent, the Western Hemisphere, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, India, Pakistan, the Tashkent Agreement, the Soviet Union, the Chinese situation, Vietnam



228 - Remarks at a Democratic Party Dinner in Chicago.
May 17, 1966

I sent our ambassadors to more than 40 countries. I wrote letters to nearly 120 in the world asking for assistance, asking for peace. My plea was well received in all the nations of the world except the two most concerned, Red China and North Vietnam



277 - The President's News Conference
June 18, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. I read Senator Mansfield's speech with a great deal of interest and pleasure. I asked Secretary Rusk to give the majority leader's observations very careful consideration. He is doing that. 
I have not discussed in detail with Senator Mansfield any information he may have about the willingness of the Chinese Foreign Minister to meet with Secretary Rusk. But I think we have made it very clear that we will be delighted to review the Senator's views, any information he has, and give careful consideration to them



311 - "Two Threats to World Peace" - Remarks in Omaha on the Occasion of the Sending of the Five-Millionth Ton of Grain to India
June 30, 1966

A few years ago the nations of free Asia lay under the shadow of Communist China. They faced a common threat, but not in unity. They were still caught up in their old disputes and dangerous confrontations. They were ripe for aggression.
Now that picture is changing

They shifted over to heavy weapons, using imported ammunition, most of it coming from Communist China

There is nothing that we want in Communist China. There is nothing the American people want from Communist China.


325 - Remarks to the American Alumni Council: United States Asian Policy.
July 12, 1966

Communist China's policy of aggression by proxy is failing

A peaceful mainland China is central to a peaceful Asia. 
A hostile China must be discouraged from aggression. 
A misguided China must be encouraged toward understanding of the outside world and toward policies of peaceful cooperation. 
For lasting peace can never come to Asia as long as the 700 million people of mainland China are isolated by their rulers from the outside world. 
We have learned in our relations with other such states that the weakness of neighbors is a temptation, and only firmness that is backed by power can really deter power that is backed by ambition. But we have also learned that the greatest force for opening closed minds and closed societies is the free flow of ideas and people and goods. 
For many years, now, the United States has attempted in vain to persuade the Chinese Communists to agree to an exchange of newsmen as one of the first steps to increased understanding between our people. 
More recently, we have taken steps to permit American scholars, experts in medicine and public health, and other specialists to travel to Communist China. And only today we, here in the Government, cleared a passport for a leading American businessman to exchange knowledge with Chinese mainland leaders in Red China. 
All of these initiatives, except the action today, have been rejected by Communist China



338 - The President's News Conference
July 20, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. It is the same as it was in my speech. I spelled it out in somewhat substantial detail in that speech. I feel that we should do everything we can to increase our exchanges, to understand other people better, to have our scientists and our businessmen, our authors and our newspaper people exchange visits and exchange viewpoints. 
I would hope that as a result of tearing down these harriers that some day all people in this world would be willing to be guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that all peoples would want to cease aggression and would try to live in peace and understanding with their neighbors. 
So far as I am concerned, every day I am looking for new ways to understand the viewpoint of others. And I hope that at a not too distant date mainland China will be willing to open some of the barriers to these exchanges and be willing to perhaps come nearer to abiding by the principles laid down in the United Nations Charter



346 - Remarks in Indianapolis at a Ceremony Marking the 150th Anniversary of the State of Indiana.
July 23, 1966

Inside Communist China there is a struggle for power. There is a great debate going on today on the future of policy. It is obvious that their past policies have failed. In time, we hope and we believe that the mainland Chinese will come to terms with their neighbors and the rest of the world



397 - Remarks at a Navy League Luncheon, Manchester, New Hampshire.
August 20, 1966

And for more than 39 days, while we pleaded with 40 countries--every place we went we received favorable response except from the two countries that could do something about it, North Vietnam and Red China


398 - Remarks at Battery Park, Burlington, Vermont
August 20, 1966

Sure, we don't have all those things that we want. We must do better. We must have objectives, we must have goals. We must move forward. But when you look at our problems and those of the Soviet Union, when you look at our problems and those of Red China, when you look at our problems and those of Castro's Cuba, you have so much to be thankful for



417 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
August 27, 1966

The Denver speech was an elaboration, perhaps, and a freshening up of what I said in the speech I made as a young Congressman on the floor of the House on our relations with other nations when we had the Truman doctrine pending. At that time I said that we should have a domestic policy and people abroad should judge our foreign policy by what we are doing at home

I think it is very important for the Communist Chinese, the Russians, the North Vietnamese to know this--as I tried to say in my press conference the other day
THE PRESIDENT. I have always felt it essential for all of them to understand it. I feel the same way about the Chinese on the mainland and the North Vietnamese. The purpose of the Baltimore speech 16 was so they could really understand what was in our heart. 
That is a difficulty we have with the Communists when we try to get them to let newspapermen go into China. They refuse it and refuse to let us send them some of our exchange people. This even happens to the Soviet Union. They stop them in Tokyo
I think it is going to take a lot of explaining for the Russians to see what is truly in our hearts, because it is so different from what they really believe. The same thing is true of China and North Vietnam. 
We would like to see people go into Red China. We would like for some of them to come in here. I have gone into that in other areas. I tried to touch on that when I talked about our interests in the Pacific in my television speech that Mr. Fulbright 17 pointed out might have involved new commitments. It doesn't. We have no new commitments. We made that clear to him


420 - Remarks to the Delegates to the American Legion National Convention.
August 30, 1966

Make no mistake about the character of this war. Our adversaries have done us at least one great service: They have described this war for what it is--in unmistakable terms. It is meant to be the opening salvo in a series of bombardments--or, as they are called in Peking, "wars of liberation." 
And if it succeeds in South Vietnam, then, as Marshal Lin Piao says, "The people in other parts of the world will see . . . that what the Vietnamese people can do, they can do, too." 
It may be that this is only rhetoric. It may be that this is only the grandiose propaganda of one whose country has not fared so wall in other continents this year. But as the Economist of London wrote only last week, "Until and unless there is solid evidence that China does not intend to do what Lin Piao says it wants to do, or cannot do it, the only safe assumption for the Americans or anybody else to make is that the Chinese mean every word they say. That," says the Economist, "is where any sober Asia policy starts from." 
The bravery of young American patriots on the battlefield, the steadfast determination of our people at home, will--in time-bring an end to this trial of aggression.











