MID 12502, US v USSR, 18 mar to 17-Apr-58 to 24-Oct-58


49 - Remarks at Sixth Annual Republican Women's National Conference.
March 18, 1958

First, a world in which we have begun to throw up increasing tariff and quota restrictions against imports. What happens? Bitter resentment among peoples whose good will and help is essential to our collective security. A sharp cut in their purchases from us--and sales to us. A severe blow to their vitally necessary development programs. A resultant mounting of unrest and violence. Offers by the Soviets to take their output on a barter basis. A desperate turning toward the communists, for want of an alternative. A gradual shackling of the smaller country's economy to that of the Soviets. Then it becomes an economic satellite, overrun with communist technicians and agents. At last national and personal freedoms are lost. Eventually, as one country after another runs this course, the United States will find itself beleaguered and alone. Then our nation's economy will be shrunken, its military posture damaged, and its young men drafted by the millions for the grim defense of their friendless country



56 - The President's News Conference
March 26, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Of course I can't tell what they will accept, but we are hopeful that the United Nations will designate the Scientific Committee for Detection, I believe it is, of Radioactivity--that's about its name. On that committee are U. S. S. R., Czechoslovakia, the United States, U. K., Canada, and a few others. As a matter of fact, Mr. Hagerty can give you also the entire list of nations. 

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Of course, anything is a possibility. As we have been reporting from time to time, they have undergone a long series of tests and I don't know what they will do, of course. 
So far as we are concerned, we have been perfectly honest in stating exactly what we expect to do. It has been many months ago that we announced our spring tests; and we have always stated that when there was any reliable agreement for stopping tests, and particularly when this can be connected with elimination of manufacture for weapon purposes, that we would be quite ready to go with the thing. 
I don't know anything about the possibility of their making a statement.
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Roberts, as I have told you time and again, certainly I believe it would be unwise to take a perfectly rigid position in respect to any of these things where any agreement would seem to be a reliable one, and would seem to be opening the door to wider and better negotiations with the Soviet Union. 
Now, I have not only had many conferences with Dr. Killfan, but with others in the scientific world about the feasibility of detecting tests. 
While I think there is certainly a little field for uncertainty, and some differing opinion, I think that by and large for any sizable test of any kind, if it didn't go way down into the, you might say, fractional kiloton, that the tests ought with proper inspectional facilities, seismic and electronic, and so on, that they ought to be detected. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, that is a very difficult guess to make, you might say. 
This is what I am trying to do: I am trying to maintain a position that I think is conciliatory, that will reflect reasonableness and logic and truth as we see it. 
Now, we simply, as I see it, must not by going to a Summit meeting appear to accept every contention that the Soviets are now making. In other words, we must not tacitly say "Yes, we approve of everything that they are now saying as possible subjects for conversation." It isn't necessarily true or acceptable to us. As I say again, we must be careful to prepare these meetings properly. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I really believe it is their hoped for effect upon the world at large. By saying these things, by seeing in the papers what they purport to mean, they believe they are getting the world convinced that Russia really wants peace and negotiated agreements that are sound and practical and fair to both sides and enforceable. 
Now, that is what they, it seems to me, are trying to get over. Now, when you take ourselves, and we try to analyze these things--remember, we are handicapped by the attempt at least to observe fact and truth why sometimes our answers may not seem as convincing; and if they think they are getting a propaganda advantage, there it is.


58 - Address at the National Conference on International Trade Policy.
March 27, 1958

The danger of the Soviet economic offensive is clear: to the leaders of Communist imperialism economic relations are merely another means of gaining control over nations that become economically dependent upon the Communist bloc.
It is the Communist system that the Kremlin is determined to export. 
It is the system of economic freedom that the Kremlin is determined to destroy.
If, through utilizing trade and aid they can tempt free nations one by one into their spider web, they will have paved the way for political victory. And--they will have made progress toward their great goal of economic encirclement of the United States. 
Though its resources do not by any means match our own, the Soviet Union is enabled by despotic concentration to use them effectively for special purposes. By forced investment, heavy industrialization and the repression of consumer needs, the Soviet bloc is producing on a growing scale the goods and capital equipment which many of the newer nations must have for their own economic development. 
The Soviet capacity to export is coupled by a willingness to import. It is offering to receive raw materials and other products which free nations have to sell. Thus the Communist bloc holds out the prospect of becoming an important supplier of capital and equipment to free nations and a large market for their surplus products



63 - The President's News Conference
April 2, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I didn't say that we didn't know anything about it or had suspected--for a long time it has been suspected, but we didn't have any proof that it was going to occur. 
Now, I don't know of any better answer than has already been given to you about this particular subject than that already given by Secretary Dulles after complete and long discussions with me and with complete agreement as to our memories of events and what we think about it. 
So I just relate this one principal fact, that we had discussed this thing as a possibility on our own side--that is, unilateral abandonment of tests--and decided that it was not good for the United States at this time
THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course, you do get somewhat into the realm of speculative thinking. I have not abandoned hope that there will be a sufficient conciliatory attitude by the Soviets so that there can be a constructive Summit meeting. The testing thing of which you speak, I think is just a side issue, I think it is a gimmick, and I don't think it is to be taken seriously; and I believe anyone that studies this matter thoroughly will see that that is not any harsh opinion on the matter. 
But this doesn't mean that we should fail to seek some common ground where there is a beginning made toward agreements in which we can work better cooperatively. 
Let me read you just a little. You say we have been doing the same • things, and I am just going to take the subjects--I am not going to read this whole paper. I will give you this paper if you can get copies made. This is just the subjects that the United States has proposed unilaterally, not with others with respect to our allies--unilaterally: 
The Baruch plan, 1946; the preparation of realistic measures for inspection and control; the open skies proposal; the peaceful use of outer space; the transfer of nuclear weapon stocks to peaceful use--I mean, even cannibalizing these stocks so that we could use them for power and such other peaceful uses; freedom of travel; and the limitation of the U. N. veto. 
All of these have been proposed seriously by the United States unilaterally. 
And I want to bring this one thing out. I don't think we are being negative when you are firm but are standing on what you believe to be the truth, the facts, and the welfare of the free world, including specifically the welfare of the United States.
So I don't think you are negative just because you are firm.



70 - The President's News Conference
April 9, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't make that a necessary condition at all. If there was preparatory work of another kind that was effective and was satisfactory, why, certainly, I wouldn't put that as a separate condition


74 - The President's News Conference
April 16, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I'll tell you: remember, it is not to be compared too exactly with the Geneva conference, because we stated in advance that we knew of no particular advantage to be gained, we were really trying to create an atmosphere. You will remember that in the statements of a number of us at that time, not only here in the United States but in some other countries, the idea was to get a better atmosphere in the hope that some of our problems then could be discussed more fruitfully and possibly get some kind of agreement. 
Now, we have gotten to the point where the specific problems themselves are brought up, and the Russians say, or Soviets say, there are certain ones they won't discuss. We say if you don't discuss those, you cannot discuss anything that is worthwhile. Therefore we are having this trouble. 
Now, for the contusion as to what the Geneva conference accomplished: at the moment, I think there was at least this satisfaction in the free world--and even when they found in October, only 3 or 4 months afterward, that the Russians would accept none of the proposals of the foreign ministers for wider contacts and all that sort of thing--there were
17 proposals in that one field, they didn't accept a one--I think there was still that satisfaction that at least we went to see whether people could just deal in a more friendly fashion in governmental circles. 
To that extent, then, I'd say that was about all. I wouldn't have any brief now to file as to the accomplishments of the Geneva conference
THE PRESIDENT. You are asking a double-barrelled question all right, but there is no question that there has been a very great departure in accustomed usage of diplomatic communications and channels. 
This is evidenced by the one thing of taking communications between heads of government or heads of state and publishing them immediately. These are normally considered to be the most confidential type of communication. 
In fact I have never, except when my correspondent has suggested so, I have never even admitted that I wrote a letter, that I received a letter, and certainly I have never exposed any of its contents and I wouldn't do so. This is, I think, somewhat in accordance with the accepted practices, so therefore you must conclude that this publication of everything that is communicated between such individuals must be for propaganda purposes and therefore it at least has this very serious effect: you do not take as seriously such a communication as one that has, you might say, included within itself evidence of its good faith and sincerity. 
Therefore, I don't want to make any comment particularly with respect to the peace or to the Summit meeting, but I do say it is not good practice. 
THE PRESIDENT. That I don't know. 





80 - Address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors and the International Press Institute.
April 17, 1958

Now all of us deplore this vast military spending. Yet, in the face of the Soviet attitude, we realize its necessity. Whatever the cost, America will keep itself secure

Today I have been speaking mainly about military problems. Overseas we can count on the Soviet propaganda to twist these statements into accusations that we are making threats and are obsessed with war making techniques. But all the world knows, as we do, that neither war nor the technique of war has ever been America's primary concern. 
I believe further that in this struggle the strength that endures rests with those who live in freedom. Tyranny is too brittle--too insecurely based--too dependent upon force and brutality--too contrary to the hopes and ideals of humanity--to last over the long pull. The day will surely come when this undeniable truth will dawn upon even the rulers of the Soviet Union, as already it is dawning upon their peoples. Then, we shall see at last the true worth of all our effort, all our sacrifice, all our prayers


83 - The President's News Conference
April 23, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course there has been a lot of overstatement. If you were going to exist and your military establishment is going to exist in this day of possible surprise, you must make sure that big and expensive planes are gotten off fields that could be targets. Once they are off, they have to get proper orders, but that is all that this particular thing is--the essentials of this particular idea that was so exploited by Mr. Gromyko. 
Now, Mr. Sobolev yesterday did a lot of quoting of statements from military men and Secretaries in the Defense Department, and I dislike, of course, to see him given ammunition; but, as to what the Soviets now are trying to do with respect to the Summit or any other method of having fruitful negotiations is really puzzling to me. I talked it over with several of my associates this morning, and I don't see that there is any really good guess or conclusion to give at the moment. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, you say, "if it should come down to that." [Laughter] 
Let's remember this: the United States does not speak authoritatively for all of the countries that are associated with us in our opposition to communism, but the Soviets do. Therefore, any such maneuver as that I could interpret as nothing except a determination or an effort on their part to divide and to weaken. 
I would think if there were special problems between ourselves, not affecting anybody else--for example, some financial problem between the two of us or any problem of that kind--then there would be diplomatic means of settling it. If necessary, you might even possibly have your foreign ministers. But I think that a so-called Summit conference as between two of us at this time would be difficult to justify. 
THE PRESIDENT. As a matter of fact, I don't know what has been stated; I don't know of any facts that haven't been published. You are making a statement there that there is rather a campaign along our coasts. You'll have to get the facts on that one, because I haven't any such facts
Now, the other countries, allies, have tried to keep ahead of this business and particularly Britain, as you know, has actually tested bombs, hydrogen and atomic. But they are still lacking much information of the way to use this thing, how to use the clean or cleaner weapons. There are many things that they don't know. So, therefore, they would very much like to know these things which we are quite sure the Russians already know




88 - The President's News Conference
April 30, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't know what these reports are that you are mentioning. We have taken no new official position since the London conferences of last year when, in company with our associates, we presented to the Soviets a very, what we thought, comprehensive and sensible disarmament program and particularly pointed out how we thought beginnings toward it could be taken. As you know, those were refused by the Soviets. 
We have been under a considerable amount of correspondence with them but there is no general change in the program
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I will say this: I think that my reaction to Mr. Gromyko's speech this time was not irritation or resentment or even a defensive feeling because of his charge. It was rather that of sadness. 
This proposal was made as seriously and as honestly as it could be made by the United States--I mean this specific proposal this moment. It has always been a part of a larger proposal, as you know, but this specific proposal was because of their charge that they were running risks and there was greater danger because of the alerting practices of our Air force. 
So, in order to allay those fears, to make it so that each of us could believe that this one great strategic route across the Pole and across the Arctic regions could be denied or at least examined, we proposed this as a way of allaying the suspicion about this alerting of our planes, and at the same time thought that it could probably be accepted by them as so sensible and so easy to do that maybe we could use it as the first step toward an agreement between ourselves that, having been successful, might lead on to something better. 
So, as I say, to think that in this we were just trying to score a propaganda point, well, to my mind it's just--almost silly to talk of it in that way. It was a very serious proposition, and I still hope that they would reconsider their opinion on it




95 - Remarks at 14th Annual Washington Conference of the Advertising Council.
May 6, 1958

see no reason this year for changing the pattern. Our prime need is still peace. Our great threat is still a dictatorship that is insensitive to human values, that is tyrannical and will not give up its publicly announced purpose of subjugating the world by one means or another--in other words, to bring about the so-called "revolution of the proletariat" and establish the world under a Communist philosophy under the control of the Kremlin. 
This threat of theirs, of course we know, is no idle boast. They have built a tremendous military machine and they have shown a very great skill in inventing, developing and using weapons of the most destructive power the world has known. 
Now, all of this, combined with their readiness and their skill in using propaganda, and its political and economic penetration, poses for us a broader threat than we pictured even just one year ago. 
While we believed then they were concentrating more on the military threat, yet now we see the Soviets at least partially blocked in their readiness to threaten weaker nations with military power and to bring about an uneasiness and unstable political situation in neighboring smaller countries. They turn more and more to the economic, the political, the propaganda types of invasion of these other countries
Now since this economic invasion of the Soviets has started, we calculate something over two billion dollars has been sent by them in credits abroad, at very low rates of interest--two percent and so on. But more than that, they are showing a greater and greater readiness to indulge just in barter trade. And in barter trade, since they can set their price any way they want, any time they want, and under any conditions, we are handicapped unless we take hold of this problem in the most sensible, logical and comprehensive way we possibly can




96 - Address at Republican National Committee Dinner in Honor of the Republican Members of Congress.
May 6, 1958

Now in recognition of the soundness of the free world's military defenses, the Soviets have lately turned more and more from military to economic assaults on free world positions. So, while the need for military assistance remains--yet for all of us--the economic side of mutual security becomes day by day more essential to the common defense. That includes the security and freedom of every person listening tonight. 
Since 1953 the communists have signed almost 100 trade agreements with the less developed nations. They have loaned those nations some $2 billion, at interest rates enticingly favorable.
Now these developments are very significant. 
Throughout the Asian and African continents, vast reserves of human energy and natural resources are opening up in a way that has not happened for centuries. Knowing this--knowing also the Soviet maneuvers I just mentioned--we must make a fateful decision. 
Either we idly stand by and watch this tremendous force funneled into violence, dissolution of orderly government and communist exploitation. Or--we help channel it into better education and improved living standards, and thereby strengthen peace and freedom everywhere in the world. 
So far as I am concerned--and here again I believe I speak for the great majority of Americans--we have no alternative but to give that help. America's goal is peace and human liberty, not just a precarious truce based on force
And so in trade too our choice is clear: we will have reciprocity, or we will have retaliation. And I wholeheartedly choose the former. In passing, may I remind you that fifty years ago reciprocity was eloquently supported by a great Republican President--William McKinley. Now, how does all this relate to the Soviet menace? 
This way: if in their new economic offensive the Soviets, by using trade and aid, can bring free nations one by one into their orbit, they will as surely have paved the way for communist control of the world as if they had conquered those nations by force.



141 - The President's News Conference
June 18, 1958

And, finally, the execution of Nagy and Maleter. I cannot think of any incident that could have and has more shocked the civilized world. These two men were not guilty of evil doing. They were fighting for their own country, to eliminate or to reduce the domination by force of their country on the part of the Soviets. Good faith was violated in their execution, the story of which has just come to our attention in this country. 
It is clear evidence that the intent of the Soviets is to pursue their own policies of terror and intimidation in any way they choose, to bring about complete subservience to their will. 
I think there is no incident that should have more alerted the free world to the lack of confidence that we are compelled to feel in the words and actions of these Communist imperialists. I am ready for questions
THE PRESIDENT. Well I think I should like to answer that question in this way: there has been a very great feeling in the free world that possibly we have been reluctant to acknowledge that the Soviets were more ready to negotiate, and to negotiate in good faith. 
The news from the free world today is that the revulsion that people are feeling everywhere is evidenced in a number of places, in a number of countries--picketing or demonstrating in front of Soviet Embassies and so on. 
So I would say anything of this kind that shocks the whole free world, its whole conscience and its whole beliefs, is detrimental to fruitful negotiations.
THE PRESIDENT. I will help. I would give aid to anything that I would think would help to weaken the solidarity of the Communist bloc. 
If we can set up centrifugal as opposed to centripetal forces, we are, in my mind, doing a great service for the free world. And, through trade, through possibilities for these people--I suppose, the ones we are talking about now are Poland and Yugoslavia--if they can make stronger their independent action, vis-a-vis the Soviets, that is all to the good. 
It has often been said, you know, that trade follows a flag; it's entirely possible, too, that the flag tends to follow trade; and there could be some trading in this way that would awaken new interest in these countries to pull away from Moscow. I think to that extent we would be advantaged





153 - The President's News Conference
July 2, 1958

Now, the cases that come up are not similar in their circumstances. for example, the case in Russia, the case in East Germany, the one in China are entirely different from the one in Cuba. Here it is a dissident portion of the nation which, alleging that this country--and I might say inaccurately--but, nevertheless, alleging that this country has been giving improper support to the government of Cuba, has taken these individuals apparently as hostages to secure some kind of accommodation or support for themselves

THE PRESIDENT. No. I would certainly be unable to give any accurate estimate of their motives. 
Frankly, it is difficult to understand, sometimes, exactly what they mean, and sometimes I think it may be translating difficulties because we get expressions that do not seem to have meanings that we would normally give to similar expressions. 
What we did was this: believing that at the very last minute a conference of this kind should not be abandoned--it was, we thought, a very bad thing to do in our international relations--we sent our people on, knowing at the very least we would show seriousness and earnestness in our effort to do our part of solving the problem that was laid before the technical committee. 
Moreover, it seemed to us dear that even conversations among our technical friends from friendly countries would bring about possibly a broader and better understanding on our own part for anything in the future. 
When the Soviet scientists appeared, we were very pleased; and rather than to express any criticism at this moment, I would like to express a word of hope that from this there may be some kind of understanding that can lead along a little bit to a next one




163 - Address to the Members of the Canadian Houses of Parliament.
July 9, 1958

Last month an agreement was concluded between our two Governments to establish a combined air defense headquarters for this continent. We have also--both of us--striven, as we will continue to strive, for the Soviet Union's agreement to a system of inspection to protect against surprise attack through the Arctic. Recent Soviet communications have strengthened the hope that they will come to see that by such a system any basis for their professed fears of an attack across the Pole will be removed. for Canada and for the United States such a system in operation would add measurably to our security against a sudden attack. Possibly it might also pave the way for still further measures of arms control and permit some reduction of the burden and danger of modern armaments



173 - Statement by the President following the Landing of United States Marines at Beirut.
July 15, 1958

Warned and alarmed by these developments, President Chamoun of Lebanon sent me an urgent plea that the United States station some military units in Lebanon to evidence our concern for the independence of Lebanon, that little country, which itself has for about two months been subjected to civil strife. This has been actively fomented by Soviet and Cairo broadcasts and abetted and aided by substantial amounts of arms, money and personnel infiltrated into Lebanon across the Syrian border

You will remember at the time of the Korean war that the Soviet Government claimed that this was merely a civil war, because the only attack was by North Koreans upon South Koreans. But all the world knew that the North Koreans were armed, equipped and directed from without for the purpose of aggression. 
This means of conquest was denounced by the United Nations General Assembly when it adopted in November 1950 its Resolution entitled, "Peace through Deeds." It thereby called upon every nation to refrain from "fomenting civil strife in the interest of a foreign power" and denounced such action as "the gravest of all crimes against peace and security throughout the world." 
We had hoped that these threats to the peace and to the independence and integrity of small nations had come to an end. Unhappily, now they reappear. Lebanon was selected to become a victim. 
Last year, the Congress of the United States joined with the President to declare that "the United States regards as vital to the national interest and world peace the preservation of the independence and integrity of the nations of the Middle East



198 - The President's News Conference
August 6, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, it would be difficult for me to express my opinion adequately. 
Now, the history of this century shows to my mind very definitely the basic purposes and principles of the United States as they are applied to the rest of the world. 
We have sought sovereignty over no other country; we have not tried to make any country or any people or any nation subservient to us in any way, politically or through military force or through economic
means. 
We do believe that freedom and the principle of liberty is indivisible in the world and, therefore, when freedom of the weak, the independence of the weak, is threatened, the United States has a very deep responsibility; indeed, in its own self interest it must attempt to carry that responsibility. 
Now, since the founding of the United Nations we have tried to do this collectively. We believe it should be done, and we believe certainly in the Charter of that organization. And only where--because of the critical circumstances as they came in the Lebanon situation, because of the unexpected revolt or the sudden revolt, rather, in Iraq--the United States felt that the Government of Lebanon was justified in calling for a little help, we did callfor help. We immediately put the whole problem before the United Nations again, announcing our readiness to get out of there as quickly as the United Nations could take positive action. 
As you know, both the United States resolution and the Japanese resolution were vetoed by the Soviet Union. 
But their history, which includes all of the eastern European nations that they have taken over by force and held by force since the conclusion of World War II, their adventures into North Korea and North Vietnam, all show and point to the fact that the accusation they made should be directed directly to themselves and not to us


THE PRESIDENT. Well, in that case I think we ought to do it through the United Nations because one other thing, I believe, that the United States abhors, as a corollary, as a consequence of the principles I have already talked, is any thought that big powers are going to control the world. 
There must be an equality in the sovereignty and in the rights of each nation to dictate its own affairs. So I would say in the United Nations these things should be done, and we would be prepared to go along with any decision of that kind. And, of course, we would hope that the Soviet Union not only would be prepared to do the same thing, but would actually observe its commitments. But I don't think that we ought merely to say, two or three great powers, "This is going to be the score." I do not believe that
THE PRESIDENT. Well, no; but I will tell you, I have some people studying that who told me they would give me an idea of it. I think there are some indications that he had quite a bit, but not too much




213 - The President's News Conference
August 20, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. No, we have no evidence that he is doing it. 
Now, we have had reports of comments that are made in the Kremlin and in Moscow, where there has been some rather vociferous denials of that allegation. But I would hesitate to make a real guess on it
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think there are two points: first, we did not say that we are going to have a big war if we don't stop this. I do say if they are going to continue it without any voluntary agreement of their own to limit or cease it, then I do say we are headed for much more trouble but not necessarily a big war. 
The next thing is this: finally, developing circumstances tend to point out where are the best interests of all countries served. 
I believe myself that if we can keep a sturdy course and a steady course, firm in what we believe to be right, finally even the Soviets begin to learn that it is not to their benefit to go in and try to buy, bribe, and subvert generally people that are themselves trying to live their own lives; because, finally, what all history shows, that when any dictatorship goes too far in its control, finally, whether it be the Roman Empire or Genghis Khan's or Napoleon's or anyone else's, just the very size of the thing begins to defeat them. 
So I think there are characteristics in this whole thing--accepting your premise that they probably are not going to cease it forthwith-that finally will teach them this is not really a good, profitable enterprise. But it does mean this also: we have got to keep on the job forever and forever with our own measures to make certain that these small countries and weaker countries do not fall one by one prey to their methods




222 - The President's News Conference
August 27, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, the principle of the policy has not been abandoned at all. 
Now, we did say this: that in order to facilitate the possibility of negotiations in this field, that if both sides would accept this report and would each agree to begin instantly to meet--October 31st is the date we mentioned--to start negotiations for measures that would lead further, then for one year we would not make any more tests. 
But we did couple that with the policy that we believe in, that the cessation of tests must be related to the cessation of production of this material for weapons purposes, and even further on than that eventually. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I think there is no change because we have believed--maybe I don't understand your question exactly. We said you cannot have an agreement on cessation of tests unless there can be technical methods that will make certain each to the other that we are acting in good faith. 
Now, that is the thing that the technical experts were deciding: is it possible; and if it is possible, what is the minimum system that will do it? 
We say, "All right, we are accepting that, now let's move on to the next negotiation," and, while we are doing that, that negotiation is the actual establishment of this system. 
That being done, now you have got it with that much of a testing, it looks like you have a step made into penetrating both these countries on an official basis--a good many stations in Eurasia, a good many stations here. 
Now, it would seem, there ought to be another step. But I think that for each one of the things that still has to be negotiated out, we have not changed our general program or plan
THE PRESIDENT. I say only this: when I came here, you will remember, we were talking about the "New Look." We were trying to get away from mere reliance upon manpower, and to use the latest in scientific inventions to defend this country, hoping thereby to save manpower. This took a long study, and after the first months, I finally appointed scientific committees, two in succession. finally there was brought forward a belief that we should go very heavily into ballistic missiles of long range, which had never before been brought to the fore in military planning. 
I believe--I think I am right--there never was more than $1 million a year used until that year. But in the spring of 1955, I believe, I listened to this latest scientific report, and this went on the very highest priority-expenditures put on a priority higher than that of any other of our defense things. 
From that moment on, there has been no place that I can see where there has been any possibility of gaps occurring. 
Development has been extraordinarily rapid in view of the few years we have had, and while procurement should never go so wild that it wants to purchase great, vast weapons until they are approved, I am quite certain that the Defense Department's programs are not only adequate, but really are generous in making certain that the United States in this one particular field is going faster than we could have expected. 
I want to bring this out: up to this moment, I don't see how you can begin to eliminate the manned carrier, the airplane, merely because there can be demonstrated a capacity for sending a warhead by a guided missile. There is still a long ways to go before the airplane, I would say, is made completely obsolete. So while, if there is any gap, I am quite certain that our enormous strength in fine long-range airplanes is--it isn't a "gap"; if the rate of development is not as rapid as you might see it, if you are talking just about money, and money won't do it in my opinion, the airplane takes care of that deficiency



261 - Radio and Television Report to the American People Regarding the Situation in the Formosa Straits.
September 11, 1958

This plan would liquidate all of the free world positions in the Western Pacific area and bring them under captive governments which would be hostile to the United States and the free world. Thus the Chinese and Russian Communists would come to dominate at least the Western half of the now friendly Pacific Ocean. 
In this effort the Chinese Communists and the Soviet Union appear to be working hand in hand. Last Monday I received a long letter on this subject from Prime Minister Khrushchev. He warned the United States against helping its allies in the Western Pacific. He said that we should not support the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea. He contended that we should desert them, return all of our naval forces to our home bases, and leave our friends in the far East to face, alone, the combined military power of the Soviet Union and Communist China. Does Mr. Khrushchev think that we have so soon forgotten Korea? I must say to you very frankly and soberly, my friends, the United States cannotaccept the result that the Communists seek. Neither can we show, now, a weakness of purpose--a timidity--which would surely lead them to move more aggressively against us and our friends in the Western Pacific area. 
If the Chinese Communists have decided to risk a war, it is not because Quemoy itself is so valuable to them. They have been getting along without Quemoy ever since they seized the China mainland nine years ago. 
If they have now decided to risk a war, it can only be because they, and their Soviet allies, have decided to find out whether threatening war is a policy from which they can make big gains. 
If that is their decision, then a Western Pacific Munich would not buy us peace or security. It would encourage the aggressors. It would dismay our friends and allies there. If history teaches anything, appeasement would make it more likely that we would have to fight a major war. 
Congress has made clear its recognition that the security of the Western Pacific is vital to the security of the United States and that we should be firm. The Senate has ratified, by overwhelming vote, security treaties with the Republic of China covering Formosa and the Pescadores, and also the Republic of Korea. We have a mutual security treaty with the Republic of the Philippines, which could be next in line for conquest if Formosa fell into hostile hands. These treaties commit the United States to the defense of the treaty areas. In addition, there is a Joint Resolution which the Congress passed in January 1955 dealing specifically with Formosa and the offshore islands of Free China in the Formosa Straits. At that time the situation was similar to what it is today. Congress then voted the President authority to employ the armed forces of the United States for the defense not only of Formosa but of related positions such as Quemoy and Matsu, if I believed their defense to be appropriate in assuring the defense of Formosa. 
I have repeatedly sought to make clear our position in this matter so that there would not be danger of Communist miscalculation. The Secretary of State on September fourth made a statement to the same end. This statement could not, of course, cover every contingency. Indeed, I interpret the Joint Resolution as requiring me not to make absolute advance commitments, but to use my judgment according to the circumstances of the time. But the statement did carry a clear meaning to the Chinese Communists and to the Soviet Union. There will be no retreat in the face of armed aggression, which is part and parcel of a continuing program of using armed force to conquer new regions. 
I do not believe that the United States can be either lured or frightened into appeasement. I believe that in taking the position of opposing aggression by force, I am taking the only position which is consistent with the vitalinterests of the United States, and, indeed with the peace of the world. 
Some misguided persons have said that Quemoy is nothing to become excited about. They said the same about South Korea--about Viet Nam, about Lebanon. 
Now I assure you that no American boy will be asked by me to fight just for Quemoy. But those who make up our armed forces--and I believe the American people as a whole--do stand ready to defend the principle that armed force shall not be used for aggressive purposes. 
Upon observance of that principle depends a lasting and just peace. It is that same principle that protects the Western Pacific free world positions as wall as the security of our homeland. If we are not ready to defend this principle, then indeed tragedy after tragedy would befall us. 



274 - The President's News Conference
October 1, 1958

I should say an extra word there about their civil war: if it is a civil war, why is Russia already saying, through Mr. Khrushchev in his letters, that they are ready to participate in this war? If that is a civil war I am quite ignorant as to what the term really means. 
So I do not believe, Mr. Wilson, that there is anything of appeasement. I do believe this: we want a peaceful solution, and fundamentally anyone can see that the two islands as of themselves, as two pieces of territory, are not greatly vital to formosa. But of course the Chinese Nationalists hold that if you give way to that, you have given away to exposing us to attack, and that is a different thing from just Concluding that two pieces of territory are the vital issue
With respect to the Sputnik incidents of the Russians, I should say they represent, as the whole world recognizes, remarkable achievements, and they are additional evidence of the quality of the top Russian scientists right down the whole field. 
Our committees that come back to the United States, our electrical committee, the steel committee and the others, they come back and they report very great, tremendous advances in the scientific character of all of their steel-making facilities and everything else. In one or two instances it has been said to me, "You know, these people in one or two kinds of items are ahead of us, even in quality, and you might say, in the height of the scientific ingenuity that has been displayed." 
Now, we have, I believe in the last 7 months, put four satellites in orbit. Our plan was devised, as I pointed out before, with an entirely different purpose from that that the Soviets had. 
We started it as a part of the Geophysical Year. It was our responsibility that we voluntarily assumed. When it comes to the weaponry, I point it out to you again, the Russians started with their German scientists that they had secured right after 1945. 
Our own interest in this particular field was not very great. We went into long-range weapons, missiles, but they were aerodynamic. They were not the ballistic missiles. In other words, we didn't go at all into the IRBM and the ICBM's. 
So, when I came in here, I got two successive scientific committees to go into this thing and find out what was going on, what we should be doing, and it took them quite a long time. But, along about a year and a half after the first committee was organized, we believed that we knew what we should do. That was the first time that anything was really dedicated--any sizable sum--to ballistic missiles of a long range. And the whole project was now put on first priority, over every other expenditure. 
But, remember, with our curve starting over here, and theirs here, we had to get a very steep one. I think we have constructed a very steep curve of accomplishment but, naturally, with that length of time, there are going to be some incidents here and there where we are not satisfied with our results. 
But they are going ahead, and I believe we have the biggest, strongest, finest body of scientists amply armed with money to do the job, and that's that. 



286 - Remarks at the Dedication of the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service of Georgetown University.
October 13, 1958

He made no wild charges. In fact, it was a speech where every statement was annotated--corroborated--by the documents that he himself had procured and brought out, often out of Russia. That series of documents, by the way, was in a suitcase--two suitcases. They were filled, and he knew exactly where to go to pick each one and to read it. So I still remember that occasion if for nothing else than because of the excellence of the presentation



290 - Remarks at the National Corn Picking Contest, Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
October 17, 1958

In our ability to produce, we have a tremendous advantage over the communist world. The free American farm worker out-produces the collectivized farmer of the Soviet Union by something like four or five to one.



293 - Televised Panel Discussion With a Group of Republican Women, San Francisco, California.
October 21, 1958

The scientists went into this very thoroughly, what they believed to be the activities of the Soviets, our capabilities, technical and every other kind. finally in early 1955 they told me "We are behind and we have got to get busy." I urgently recommended this. On the very day that they gave me that recommendation, I put those programs on the first priority, so far as talent, time, and expenditures were involved in the Defense Department. And from that moment on, we have been spending hundreds of millions annually, and not as I say, below a million before that time. The result is, we are rapidly filling the gap that existed; and in some ways, I think that our scientists have already achieved what we would call even more than equality, particularly in types and kinds, even if not in numbers



295 - Radio and Newsreel Panel Discussion Sponsored by the National Republican Committee in Chicago.
October 22, 1958

In numbers of foot soldiers, of course, the Russians are way ahead of us, but they have always been that, and they have got the men. We don't believe in that. We believe in having adequate, efficient and modernized forces that will prevent war and make it too costly to wage. 
On the over-all, I would say America is the strongest military power there is in the world
THE PRESIDENT. Well now, I agree with some of the things you have heard, because of this reason: the Russians dictate what will be the education of their children. You say they are "offering" education. They are directing education, which is a vast difference, because they are being trained--you might say atmosphered in the habit of regimentation




296 - Radio and Television Address Delivered at the "Fight-to-Win" Dinner Rally in the Stockyards Arena, Chicago, Illinois.
October 22, 1958

One of my early acts, almost six years ago, was to launch exhaustive missile studies by top scientists of America. After some months they reported their findings that America badly trailed the Soviets in long-range ballistic missiles. The scientists recommended, to me, urgent action











