MID 223001, US v USSR, 14 jul to 13-Aug-84 to 19-Sep-84


Remarks on Signing the Captive Nations Week Proclamation 
July 16, 19

If our observance of Captive Nations Week is to have meaning, then it must be observed in word and in deed. Today I'm calling on people everywhere who enjoy the blessings of liberty to join with us in helping the freedom fighters in Afghanistan, because they need our support, they want our support, and they deserve our support. The cause of peace is not served by a conquering force of more than a hundred thousand Soviet troops. The cause of peace will only be served when those troops are out and Afghanistan belongs again to the Afghan people. 
We're also committed to expanding significantly the ability of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty to communicate with the peoples of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. And we're pleased that the Congress has authorized the establishment of Radio Marti, which will broadcast the truth to the people of Cuba


Remarks to an Outreach Working Group on United States Policy in Central America 
July 18, 1984

The Nicaraguan people are trapped in a totalitarian dungeon, trapped by a military dictatorship that impoverishes them while its rulers live in privileged and protected luxury and openly boast their revolution will spread to Nicaragua's neighbors as well. It's a dictatorship made all the more insulting, all the more dangerous by the unwanted presence of thousands of Cuban, Soviet-bloc, and radical Arab helpers


Remarks at a Summit Conference of Caribbean Heads of State at the University of South Carolina in Columbia 
July 19, 1984

But what was happening in Grenada was not an isolated incident. The Soviet bloc and Cuba have been committing enormous resources to undermining our liberty and independence. Nowhere is this threat more pressing than in Nicaragua, a country which today marks the fifth year of Sandinista dictatorship. 
The Sandinista revolution, like Castro's revolution, is a revolution betrayed. And now faced with mounting internal pressures and disillusionment abroad, the Sandinistas have announced an election for November of this year. We would wholeheartedly welcome a genuine democratic election in Nicaragua. But no person committed to democracy will be taken in by a Soviet-style sham election.



The President's News Conference
July 24, 1984
But you'll also find in there a statement by Ogarkov of the Soviet military. This was prior to our rescue mission in Grenada. But he openly stated that after all the years of only having a base in the Western Hemisphere in Cuba, that now they had bases here in Nicaragua and in Grenada. Well, they don't have one in Grenada anymore. And I think that it is the responsibility of this government to assist the people of Nicaragua in seeing that they don't have one in Nicaragua



Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Atlanta, Georgia 
July 26, 1984

Four years ago a tyrant held our diplomats hostage. Four years ago our defense had deteriorated to the point where many of our ships couldn't leave port. Many of our aircraft were so old that they'd been flown by the fathers of the pilots who are now flying them. And 4 years ago the Soviets took the free nation of Afghanistan for their own


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Elizabeth, New Jersey 
July 26, 1984

Four years ago, the Soviets invaded the free nation of Afghanistan, the latest in the series of countries to fall to communism in that decade. The former Vice President said, "I cannot understand; it just baffles me, why the Soviets these last few years have behaved as they have." He didn't understand. But the American people did


Telephone Interview With Dorothy Fuldheim of WEWS-TV in Cleveland, Ohio 
July 27, 1984

The President. They are right about that듯nless we can persuade the Soviet Union, and until we can persuade them to come back to the so-called START and INF talks, which are negotiations to reduce the number of weapons on both sides. 
But we have less nuclear power today than we had 20 years ago. We've withdrawn a thousand nuclear weapons from Europe, and we plan to withdraw another 1,400. In the last 10 years, the Soviet Union has added 800 ballistic missiles, intercontinental ballistic missiles of the MX type that we're seeking to build. We're trying to get permission from Congress to build 100 of those. But they have built 800 in these last 10 years; we have built none듴ero. 
And we are so far behind that we run the risk of having lost a deterrent capability; in other words, having a capability that says to them, you better not fire듥ust as they're saying to us, we better not fire. And so, what we're trying to do is update and modernize with these hundred weapons. 
Our weapons that we have on hand right now are of such an early generation that the Soviets have produced and deployed about four new generations of weapons while we have produced none. And their weapons have greater accuracy, greater power, than our old-fashioned ones. So, we're seeking just a hundred MX missiles. Ms. Fuldheim. Mr. President, thank you very much. I hope you come and visit soon again.


Informal Exchange With Reporters Prior to a Meeting With Archbishop Pio Laghi, Apostolic Delegate to the United States 
August 1, 1984

The President. Well, you've had a press conference on that and have heard what my statement was. 
The President. No, I'm not going to take any questions on that at a photo opportunity. 
The President. We're doing everything we can. 



Remarks at a White House Luncheon Marking the 40th Anniversary of the Warsaw Uprising 
August 17, 1984

It's always an honor for me to be with individuals like yourselves who understand the value of freedom. I'm reminded of a story about a conversation between one of our citizens and a Soviet citizen. The American described the freedom of speech that we have here in the United States, and the citizen of the Soviet Union said, "Well, we're free to speak in the Soviet Union just like you are in the United States." He said, "The only difference is you're free after you speak."

There are some, of course, who seem all too willing to turn a blind eye to Soviet transgressions, ostensibly to improve the dialog between East and West. But those who condemn firm support for freedom and democracy등ho, in order to prove their sincerity, would project weakness드re no friends of peace, human liberty, or meaningful dialog. 
First, let me state emphatically that we reject any interpretation of the Yalta agreement that suggests American consent for the division of Europe into spheres of influence. On the contrary, we see that agreement as a pledge by the three great powers to restore full independence and to allow free and democratic elections in all countries liberated from the Nazis after World War II, and there is no reason to absolve the Soviet Union or ourselves from this commitment. We shall continue to press for full compliance with it and with the Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act, and other international agreements guaranteeing fundamental human rights. 
Passively accepting the permanent subjugation of the people of Eastern Europe is not an acceptable alternative. In 1981, when it appeared that Poland would suffer a similar fate to that of Hungary in 1956 or Czechoslovakia in 1968, we raised our voices in support of the Polish people. And we did not remain passive when, under intense Soviet pressure, martial law was imposed on them.

Remarks at the Missouri State Fair in Sedalia 
August 19, 1984

I couldn't help but think of these things as I watched our Olympic athletes. Didn't you get the feeling that the Soviets must have been relieved when the closing ceremonies for the Olympics were over? [Applause] But the one thing they'll never see is closing ceremonies for America

The first, most important thing is that we got rid of a cynical, wrong-headed, totally unfair grain embargo. I seem to remember someone who now says he opposed the embargo in private, speaking a little differently in 1980. He said then, "What we've done will really sting." Well, someone got stung, all right, but it wasn't the Soviets. They're still in Afghanistan. It was thousands like you who deserved better from your own government. And for the life of me, how do you show you're strong by punching yourself in the breadbasket? 
That embargo cost farmers 17 million tons of grain sales to the Soviet Union in 1 year. 
Our efforts are beginning to pay off. In 1980 we had weak defenses, a weak economy, and a grain embargo that filled your bins and emptied your wallets. [Interruption] In 1984 we have stronger defenses, a stronger economy, and grain sales to the Soviet Union, the country our critics say won't deal with us. Well, over 20 million metric tons they bought since last October. And if they want to buy more, we'll sell more. [Interruption]


Remarks at an Agricultural Forum in Decatur, Illinois 
August 20, 1984

The first was ending a cynical, wrongheaded, totally unfair grain embargo. I remember someone who now says he was opposed to that embargo privately, but he was speaking a little differently in 1980. He said the grain embargo was a strong, absolutely crucial action that would force the Soviets to pay a heavy price for their aggression in Afghanistan. 
I guess it's difficult to see the world clearly when you're scrooched down behind the American farmers. [Laughter] We, of course, know that it was they듪r, I should say, you who paid the heavy price, not the Soviets. They're still in Afghanistan. 
Farm prices declined, and our entire agricultural marketing system든levators, barge lines, railways, millers, and exporters등as disrupted. The embargo cost farmers 17 million tons of grain sales to the Soviet Union. But the greatest loss was the loss of American credibility around the world as a reliable, long-term supplier. 
Now, I know it hasn't been easy, trying to make a comeback from that situation. But, make no mistake, we are coming back. In 1980 we had weak defenses, a weak economy, and that grain embargo that filled your bins and emptied your wallets. In 1984 we have stronger defenses, a stronger economy, and grain sales to the Soviet Union-the country our critics say won't deal with us듪f over 20 million metric tons since last October. And if they want to buy more, we'll sell more


Remarks Accepting the Presidential Nomination at the Republican National Convention in Dallas, Texas 
August 23, 1984

Many of our allies mistrusted us. In the 4 years before we took office, country after country fell under the Soviet yoke. Since January 20th, 1981, not 1 inch of soil has fallen to the Communists

Closer to home, there remains a struggle for survival for free Latin American States, allies of ours. They valiantly struggle to prevent Communist takeovers fueled massively by the Soviet Union and Cuba. Our policy is simple: We are not going to betray our friends, reward the enemies of freedom, or permit fear and retreat to become American policies든specially in this hemisphere. 
Ten months ago, we displayed this resolve in a mission to rescue American students on the imprisoned island of Grenada. Democratic candidates have suggested that this could be likened to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
There are some obvious and important differences. First, we were invited in by six East Caribbean States. Does anyone seriously believe the people of Eastern Europe or Afghanistan invited the Russians?

The President. Second, there are hundreds of thousands of Soviets occupying captive nations across the world. Today, our combat troops have come home. Our students are safe, and freedom is what we left behind in Grenada

There are only two nations who by their agreement can rid the world of those doomsday weapons듮he United States of America and the Soviet Union. For the sake of our children and the safety of this Earth, we ask the Soviets등ho have walked out of our negotiations듮o join us in reducing and, yes, ridding the Earth of this awful threat

The President. Make unilateral and unwise concessions to the Soviet Union?



Remarks at the National Convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars in Chicago, Illinois 
August 24, 1984

During the months that the START and INF talks were underway, we proposed seven different initiatives, and none of these were offered to the Soviets on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. Indeed, we made a number of adjustments to respond to the stated concerns of the Soviet side, and that's why we've put forward new proposals on reducing the levels of conventional forces in Europe, on a worldwide ban on chemical weapons, on ways to help reduce the possibility of conflict in Europe, and why we're working to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. 
Ours is the pursuit of a stable and enduring peace, but at the same time, it would have been indefensible and immoral to allow the deterrent posture we need to protect the peace to continue deteriorating as it was. Now, some may insist they're just as committed to a strong deterrent even as they would cancel the B-1 bomber and the Peacekeeper missile. They may deny that a nuclear freeze would preserve today's high, unequal, and unstable levels of nuclear weapons, and they may deny a freeze would reduce any incentive for the Soviets to return to the negotiating table and resume the search for equitable and fair reductions. But that way of thinking only reminds me of what Sam Rayburn, a very wise Democratic Speaker of the House, once said: Any jackass can kick a barn down, but it takes a carpenter to build one. [
I don't know whether you're aware of this, but in every year from 1975 to 1980, armies, largely supplied by Moscow, or Soviet forces themselves, invaded or seized control of a different country. First, Vietnam, then Angola, followed by Ethiopia and Cambodia듡inally, Afghanistan. Well, since 1981, that pattern has stopped. And in 1983 Grenada was saved. And every once in awhile, it's important to remember that success can also be measured by the disasters which do not happen. 
And he said, number one, Grenada produces more nutmeg than any other spot on Earth. Number two, the Soviets and the Cubans are trying to take Grenada. Number three, you can't have eggnog without nutmeg. And number four, you can't have Christmas without eggnog. And he said, number five, the Soviets and the Cubans are trying to steal Christmas. [Laughter] And he said, number six, we stopped them.


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Fountain Valley, California 
September 3, 1984

Now, for the sake of our children, for the sake of our children and the safety of our Earth, we'll continue to invite all nations, including the Soviet Union, to join us in keeping the peace and in reducing and, yes, ridding the Earth of the awful threat of destructive nuclear weapons


Remarks at the Annual Convention of the American Legion in Salt Lake City, Utah 
September 4, 1984

Yes, our defenses are being restored. And so, too, are our alliances. We have completely reoriented American foreign policy, imbuing it with a new energy and moral purpose. And in the process, we have rallied our friends throughout the world. Even as we've successfully resisted Soviet expansionism, we've opened a wide series of diplomatic initiatives that will eventually bear fruit not just in arms control treaties, but in arms reduction treaties. 
Third, we must continue to work hard toward balanced and verifiable arms reduction treaties with the Soviets, treaties that will be made all the more feasible by maintaining ourresolve to keep our defenses strong.

Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the "Choosing a Future" Conference in Chicago, Illinois 
September 5, 1984

We understand, too, the challenges your agricultural and industrial regions face. We've tried to help you meet those challenges in a number of ways득y ending a totally unfair, wrongheaded grain embargo; by restoring grain sales to the Soviet Union듪ver 22 million metric tons since August of 1983; by reaching an agreement with Japan that will virtually double our beef exports over the next 4 years; by accepting an understanding with Japan permitting our auto industry to get back on its feet after the killer interest rates in 1980; by working aggressively for more open markets and by opposing protectionist legislation like "domestic content," which would revive inflation, provoke retaliation, and destroy American jobs and farm exports


Remarks at the International Convention of B'nai B'rith 
September 6, 1984

In foreign affairs we had lost the respect of friend and foe alike, and our willpower had grown weak and soft, undermining commitments to allies like Israel. Our leaders seemed to have lost faith in the American people and in America's future. They spoke of a national malaise. On television, we saw the Stars and Stripes being burned in foreign capitals. And from Afghanistan to Grenada, the Soviets were on the march. Seldom in all its proud history had the United States of America reached such a pathetic state of apparent impotence

In the Armed Forces, our troops have newer and better equipment, and their morale has soared as we've begun to give them the pay, the training, and the respect they've always deserved. And in foreign affairs, our country is being respected again throughout the world as a leader for peace and freedom. We've strengthened our relations with Asian allies like Korea and Japan, deepened our friendship with China. In Europe, we and our NATO allies went through months of Soviet attempts to divide us and emerged more firmly united than ever. And in Central America, we're supporting the free nations of the region against the threat posed to them by the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua.

In concrete terms, our administration has strengthened the American-Israeli alliance in three crucial ways. First, we have upgraded and formalized our strategic cooperation. For the first time in history, under our administration, the United States and Israel have agreed on a formal strategic relationship. The American-Israeli Joint Political-Military Group has already begun regular meetings. Together, we're developing plans for joint efforts to counter the Soviet threat to our mutual interests in the Middle East


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on a Meeting With Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko 
September 11, 1984

I've invited Soviet Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko to meet with me at the White House on September 28th, and Mr. Gromyko has accepted. 
I believe it's important to use the opportunity provided by Mr. Gromyko's presence in the United States to confer on a range of issues of international importance.
One of my highest priorities is finding ways to reduce the level of arms and to improve our working relationship with the Soviet Union. I hope that my meeting with him will contribute to this goal, as our administration continues to work for a safer world.
The President. Well, I would answer that the facts would belie any such supposition. The fact is we have proposed meetings with the Soviet Union on a number of occasions and for a number of reasons. We have not retreated from any meetings with them. And this is the time of the opening of the U.N. General Assembly, and he has announced his intention to come here. And so, I extended an invitation that while he's here, to come down to Washington. 
The President. You'll have to ask them what their reasons are for accepting.
The President. Well, again, you'll have to ask them what their intentions are. 
The President. No. 
The President. No, this is a matter that is required of the Congress, that we are to provide the Congress with a report. This report is being readied. I haven't had a chance to study it as yet. And, so, this is not some action by us or aimed at the Soviet Union. It's supposed to be a factual report that the Congress requires. 
The President. I have no way of knowing. 
The President. But this isn't some choice of mine. This is something required by the Congress. 
The President. Andrea [Andrea Mitchell, NBC News], I'm not going to comment on what my opinion might be there. We know that the Government of the Soviet Union has traditionally been a kind of a collective government by the Politburo, and some leaders have over the years shown themselves as more dominant than others in that kind of collective. But I'm not going to hazard any guesses here because I've been facing a problem that no other President has faced, and that is the great turnover that in $ years of my term in office we've had three leaders there. And I'm just not going to hazard a guess. I'm going to deal with the Government as it's presented to me. 
The President. Well, we've never put any preconditions on any talks, contrary to what had been claimed against us. And I think that all of these tie together. 
You can't talk about militarization of outer space without recognizing that all the strategic ballistic missiles come by way of outer space. So, I think the most important thing to begin with is to see if we cannot lessen this threat hanging over the world-and for which the Soviet Union and the United States are mainly responsible듪f these powerful weapons that could affect nations, all nations, whether they were involved in a controversy or not. That would have an effect on all of civilization, and I just want to see if we can't do something that will rid the world of this threat.

Remarks Announcing Modifications in a Grain Agreement With the Soviet Union 
September 11, 1984

Consistent with the long-term agreement on grain sales, we've decided드nd the Department of Agriculture is notifying the Soviet Union듮hat the Soviets can increase by 10 million metric tons their purchase of wheat and or corn for shipment during the second year of the agreement. And the ceiling for the second year of agreement is being raised to 22 million metric tons. And I've said many times, our philosophy is against the unfair and the wrong-headed policies of grain embargoes, and we're going to continue to do everything we can to strengthen markets for America's farmers. They're the most productive people, I think, on the face of the Earth


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Endicott, New York 
September 12, 1984

Now, you may remember that some on the other side compared the American mission in Grenada with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.. 
We'll let our opponents ponder Soviet motives in world affairs all they want. We intend to concentrate on America's goal, which is human liberty.
When those immigrants came to our shores and said, "Which way E.J.?," they were asking which way opportunity, which way peace, which way freedom

Radio Address to the Nation on the Presidential Campaign 
September 15, 1984

To make a free country freer still, we want to ensure that those who produce our food and fiber have markets for their products. We've made a good start. Already, we've ended the last administration's disastrous grain embargo, restored grain sales to the Soviets with over 23 million metric tons sold in the last year, given them the go-ahead this week to buy up to 10 million tons more, and reached an agreement with Japan to virtually double our beef exports over the next 4 years



