MID 223301, US v USSR, 12 jan to 11-Feb-86 to 13-Mar-86



Remarks to Business Leaders During a White House Briefing on the Fiscal Year 1987 Budget 
January 24, 1986

But by far the most important point is this: Of all the items in the budget, defense is the only one which must be decided with reference not only to American policy but to the policies of foreign powers who would attempt to terrorize, intimidate, or threaten us and our allies. While our defenses fell into disrepair during the 1970's, the Soviets raced ahead with the biggest military buildup in the history of the world. And that buildup continues. The Soviets are engaged in space weapons research. They are constantly adding to their nuclear arsenal and are tirelessly building up their conventional armed forces, especially their navy. I don't mind sharing with you one of the exchanges that I had with Secretary General Gorbachev. He suggested that maybe we were trying to bankrupt them by forcing them into an arms race. I ended that argument when I told him we were still just trying to catch up with what they were doing. But to gut the defense budget now would be to put at risk the developing nations of the Third World, including growing democracies like El Salvador and Ecuador, to endanger the defense of Western Europe. It would cripple our hopes for successful arms talks with the Soviets, and we cannotpermit this


Remarks to Business Leaders During a White House Briefing on the Fiscal Year 1987 Budget 
January 27, 1986

While our defense fell into disrepair during the 1970's, the Soviets raced ahead with the biggest military buildup in history. And that buildup continues. I had the pleasure when Mr. Gorbachev brought up the point of our military buildup to me—as if it was somehow aimed at them—when he finished saying that, I had the pleasure of saying, "Mr. General Secretary, we're still playing catchup with you." And he changed the subject. [Laughter] But the Soviets are engaged in space research, are constantly adding to their nuclear arsenal, and are tirelessly building up their conventional armed forces, especially their navy. To cut the defense budget now any more than we have would put at risk the developing nations of the Third World, including growing democracies like El Salvador and Ecuador, and would endanger the defense of Western Europe. It would cripple our hopes for successful arms talks with the Soviets, and we cannotpermit [originally "can't permit;" changed for Yoshikoder] this.


Remarks at the Annual Dinner of the Conservative Political Action Conference 
January 30, 1986

Well, something has happened in America. In 5 short years, we have seen the kind of political change rarely seen in a generation on nearly every issue: Federal spending, tax cuts, deregulation, the fight against career criminals and for tough judges, military readiness, resistance to Soviet expansionism, and the need for candor about the struggle between freedom and totalitarianism. The old taboos and superstitions of liberalism have collapsed and all but blown away, to be replaced by a robust and enlightened conservatism, a conservatism that brings with it economic prosperity, personal opportunity, and a shining hope that someday all the peoples of the world—from Afghanistan to Nicaragua to Poland and, yes, to Angola—will know the blessings of liberty and live in the light of freedom

But there's another issue that I also believe vividly illustrates how seriously out of touch the liberals are with the American people. We sometimes forget that no one is more realistic about the nature of the threat to our freedom than the American people themselves. In fact, their intuitive realism is why that bear in the woods ad some of you can remember from the 1984 campaign was so successful. Yes, the American people want an administration that pursues every path to peace, but they also want an administration that is realistic about Soviet expansionism, committed to resisting it, and determined to advance the cause of freedom around the world. 
Now, we know that happens when an administration that has illusions about the Soviets takes over. First, there are the illusions, then the surprise and anger when the Soviets do something like invading Afghanistan. Any way you look at it, it heightened tension and the prospects for conflict. In fact, the liberal conduct of foreign policy reminds me of a little football game that was played at Notre Dame back in 1946, when Notre Dame player Bob Livingstone missed a tackle. And his teammate, all-American Johnny Lujack, screamed, "Livingstone, you so-and-so you," and he went on and on. And then, Coach Frank Leahy said, "Another sacrilege like that, Jonathan Lujack, and you'll be disassociated from our fine Catholic university." Well, in the very next play, Livingstone missed another tackle, and Coach Leahy turned to the bench and said, "Lads, Jonathan Lujack was right about Robert Livingstone." [Laughter] And that's why it's important to go to the record.
I know there's been a great deal of talk in the media recently about the situation in Southwest Africa and especially Angola. And I know also you'll be having a special guest here tomorrow evening, as I did this morning in the Oval Office. Well, let me just say now it would be inappropriate for me as President to get too specific tonight. But I do want to make a comment here on some recent history and let you draw your own conclusions. Last September, at the Lomba River in southern Angola, when a force of—I always called it "un-i-ta" 1, but recently I hear it's being called "un-e-ta"; maybe he'll tell you tomorrow which way it is—but anyway, this force of "un-i-ta" or "un-e-ta" rebels met an overwhelmingly superior force of government troops directly supported by the Soviet bloc, the UNITA forces defeated the government troops and drove them and their Communist allies from the field



Radio Address to the Nation on the Federal Budget 
February 1, 1986

Second, we will insist on modest but steady growth to sustain the defense program set in motion 5 years ago. When we came to Washington in 1981, U.S. military security had been shamefully neglected. We hadn't built a new land-based strategic missile system since the 1960's, and we'd been dismantling our nuclear warheads even as the Soviet Union was racing forward with the most awesome military buildup in history. The morale and training of our Armed Forces was sinking. An alarming percentage of our planes and ships couldn't take off or leave port. And the supply of basic munitions, like bullets and artillery shells, had fallen to an unacceptably low level. The Soviets want nothing more than to see America flinch and forsake the rebuilding program we've worked so hard to get started. We've spent 5 years making our military more competitive and America secure again. We must notpermit this vital work to be undone in the second term


Address Before a Joint Session of Congress on the State of the Union 
February 4, 1986

I mentioned that we will meet ourcommitment to national defense. We must meet it. Defense is not just another budget expense. Keeping America strong, free, and at peace is solely the responsibility of the Federal Government; it is government's prime responsibility. We have devoted 5 years trying to narrow a dangerous gap born of illusion and neglect, and we've made important gains. Yet the threat from Soviet forces, conventional and strategic, from the Soviet drive for domination, from the increase in espionage and state terror remains great. This is reality. Closing our eyes will not make reality disappear. We pledged together to hold real growth in defense spending to the bare minimum. My budget honors that pledge, and I'm now asking you, the Congress, to keep its end of the bargain. The Soviets must know that if America reduces her defenses, it will be because of a reduced threat, not a reduced resolve

Let us speak of our deepest longing for the future: to leave our children a land that is free and just and a world at peace. It is my hope that our fireside summit in Geneva and Mr. Gorbachev's upcoming visit to America can lead to a more stable relationship. Surely no people on Earth hate war or love peace more than we Americans. But we cannot stroll into the future with childlike faith. Our differences with a system that openly proclaims and practices an alleged right to command people's lives and to export its ideology by force are deep and abiding. Logic and history compel us to accept that our relationship be guided by realism—rock-hard, cleareyed, steady, and sure. Our negotiators in Geneva have proposed a radical cut in offensive forces by each side with no cheating. They have made clear that Soviet compliance with the letter and spirit of agreements is essential. If the Soviet Government wants an agreement that truly reduces nuclear arms, there will be such an agreement.


Remarks on Signing the Fiscal Year 1987 Budget and the Management Report 
February 5, 1986

The President. Well, I'm most hopeful that we can, because I think that we're living in a very dangerous world, and we're still playing catchup. We are still far behind in both conventional and strategic weapons of the Soviet Union


Remarks at the 1986 Reagan Administration Executive Forum 
February 6, 1986

Both the spirit and material well-being of the American people have improved dramatically. I don't know if any of you caught the speech a couple of nights ago—in the State of the Union— [laughter] —but, well, I tried to make it clear that our success has been based on our deep and abiding trust in the American people. Consistent with this, we've focused our attention on returning decisionmaking to State and local government and to the people themselves. Between 1979-1981, the year we got to Washington, Federal tax revenues doubled, and the Federal Government was looked to for solutions to every problem. Do you know something? If government controls and central planning were the way to a better future, we'd be importing our grain from the Soviet Union and not the other way around

We're now entering a crucial time for our administration and for the future of our country. America's ingenuity and technological know-how is creating tremendous new potential. I'm proud, for example, that we have some of America's top scientific minds researching defensive systems that might someday help mankind leave behind the threat of nuclear devastation. Now, and for all their howling, the Soviets have been pursuing such research for years. We're not about to abandon the Strategic Defense Initiative. 
And finally, there's one issue we will face in coming months which touches on both our ideals as free people and the security of our country. Today there are brave men and women fighting for their freedom and independence against great odds. In Afghanistan, in Angola, and in Nicaragua, lightly armed freedom fighters face Soviet tanks, artillery, and helicopter gunships. Edmund Burke, that great British statesman who championed the cause of American independence, once wrote, "When bad men combine, the good must associate; else they may fall one by one ...."Well, today, we cannot sit back and idly watch as the new imperialism grinds down courageous people fighting for their liberty. We must give those heroes what they need, not just to fight and die for freedom but to win for freedom. 
And nowhere is this challenge more vital to our own security than in Central America. The Soviet Union has armed the Sandinista dictatorship to the teeth. The regime in Managua, almost immediately upon seizing power, started undermining its neighbors and suppressing the rights of its people at home. Those who've taken up arms against the Communists are fighting for the rights to speak and pray, to organize labor unions, to own land, and to direct the course of government through free elections. The choice is helping these freedom fighters or seeing a Communistic dictatorship established in the heart of Central America, another Cuba. The stakes are high. We must provide the Nicaraguan freedom fighters with what they need to bring democracy to their country.

Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters 
February 10, 1986

The President. Well, I'm not technologically gifted in that way. I haven't even been able to learn to use a pocket calculator yet. [Laughter] But I do know that there are some things in high technology that we must guard and that we cannotallow to be revealed where they would have a military use and could be put to work that way. And as long as we're still trying to reduce arms in the world, and when we get to the point that if we can get to it where we have an agreement and we begin to eliminate arms and know that this might be some evidence that we can continue to exist in the world peacefully, then we might be able to change our attitude. But right now we've seen the results of some thievery of our high-tech secrets. I think we have to use restraint in how available we make them. Ms. Mathis. Last question


Interview With Lou Cannon and David Hoffman of the Washington Post 
February 10, 1986

The President. Well, I'm very hopeful that we can come to some agreement. This idea of separating out the intermediate-range weapons is, we think, a hopeful sign. And now he has not made the SDI any condition with regard to that. There are some other things in that that are, well, that are going to cause us to negotiate that we hope can be eliminated. One, he's kind of made the French and the English an element, and we don't think that we're in a position to negotiate for somebody else. And also, the problem of the same kind of intermediate-range weapons being stationed east of the Urals, targeted on Asian targets. And these are the points that have to be worked out, but I'm just optimistic that since we've opened that subject and have made some progress on it that we can achieve that. 
The President. Well, as a matter of fact, we have already, I think, made some proposals to them and haven't had a response yet. 
The President. I can't believe that about him. He was so willing for it, and even then he made the proposal that we have one in '87 in his country, which we agreed to. So, no, I just—I have to believe that he's expressing the hope—and we are, too. I would hope that we could make some progress without waiting for the next summit. 
The President. Well, we hope that it can be one of those dates—the earlier date-because of our election. It's going to be, I think, not too easy for us if we get closer to and get into the campaigning season and so forth and are trying to have a summit. They made one suggestion of a later date, but they haven't pursued it at all. And we've told them why we didn't feel we could do that. 
The President. Well, whether he dropped it or whether he never intended it to be there—because you'll remember the language that they agreed to in the agreement was something about seeking an interim agreement while we go forward with the other interim agreement on the intermediate range. So, maybe he's just now confirming that he meant this all the time. But it is progress in our eyes. 
The President. I don't see how they could go on permanently without having some aid, particularly in the face of the extensive aid that they're getting from the Soviet Union and Cuba with regard to advanced weapons systems and so forth. They've got to be able to protect themselves.


The President's News Conference
February 11, 1986
The President. Chris, I don't have any way to determine what their motives are in doing this. I only know that since the Geneva meeting there have been not only this but others released, more so than in a great many years. I am encouraged by this because I did talk at great length about the matter of human rights with the General Secretary. And all we can do is hope that this is a beginning, a sign for what is going to continue to take place. 
The President. Well, it's an argument they've used for a number of people-people who have, in their estimation, been close to some things that they feel are secrets for their own security and that they have said that they cannot let people go that have access to those secrets. Now, I have no way of judging how valid that is. But as I say, they've made a start, and I hope it is just a start and that they'll continue
The President. Well, I'd like to have it pinned down. They haven't come up with any other date. They mentioned another period, and we informed them that that was going to be running into our coming election, and we would prefer the earlier date. But, no, we haven't seen any evidence that they're trying to get out of this or anything of the kind, because they've already invited me there for one in 1987. So— 
The President. I don't think so. That kind of linkage wouldn't work
The President. One cannot minimize the importance of those bases, not only to us but to the Western World and certainly to the Philippines themselves. If you look at the basing now of the blue-ocean navy that the Soviet has built, which is bigger than ours, and how they have placed themselves to be able to intercept the 16 chokepoints in the world. There are 16 passages in the world, sea passages, through which most of the supplies and the raw material and so forth reaches not only ourselves but our allies in the Western World. And obviously, the plan in case of any kind of hostilities calls for intercepting and closing those 16 chokepoints. And we have to have bases that we can send forces to reopen those channels. And I don't know of any that's more important than the bases on the Philippines


Radio Address to the Nation on Grenada and Nicaragua 
February 22, 1986

For years, trouble had been brewing in Grenada. Power was seized by a radical group with close ties to the Communist world. They kept insisting that they had no intention of stamping out their people's fundamental rights—theright to speak or to worship God; no intention of imposing a so-called dictatorship of the proletariat. We were told that those holding power in Grenada were simply idealists charting a new and better course for the future. All of this was part of a Communist pattern of deception that has been repeated so many times in so many places. This time, however, tons of captured documents exposed these lies. Today, for example, we know that no one had to push the clique that seized power in Grenada into the arms of the Soviet Union and Cuba. From the very start, they aligned themselves with the international Communist movement and, once in power, moved quickly to undermine the freedom of the Grenadian people.

The Communists didn't succeed in Grenada, yet a similar chain of events had been happening in Nicaragua. We hear the same old lies, while the Nicaraguan people see their freedom being stolen away. The Communists have suppressed free speech and free press. Nicaragua's Communist dictators have launched a systematic attack against the church, its priests and bishops. And government-instigated mobs mocked His Holiness John Paul II. Meanwhile, the dictatorship is being armed to the teeth with Soviet military equipment. And everyone from the Soviets, Cubans, East Germans to the PLO and Qadhafi's Libyans are turning Nicaragua into a staging area for subversion and aggression against their and our neighbors


Address to the Nation on National Security 
February 26, 1986

The past 5 years have shown that American strength is once again a sheltering arm for freedom in a dangerous world. Strength is the most persuasive argument we have to convince our adversaries to negotiate seriously and to cease bullying other nations. But tonight the security program that you and I launched to restore America's strength is in jeopardy, threatened by those who would quit before the job is done. Any slackening now would invite the very dangers America must avoid and could fatally compromise our negotiating position. Our adversaries, the Soviets—we know from painful experience—respect only nations that negotiate from a position of strength. American power is the indispensable element of a peaceful world; it is America's last, best hope of negotiating real reductions in nuclear arms. Just as we are sitting down at the bargaining table with the Soviet Union, let's not throw America's trump card away. 
We need to remember where America was 5 years ago. We need to recall the atmosphere of that time: the anxiety that events were out of control, that the West was in decline, that our enemies were on the march. It was not just the Iranian hostage crisis or the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan but the fear felt by many of our friends that America could not, or would not, keep her commitments. Pakistan, the country most threatened by the Afghan invasion, ridiculed the first offer of American aid as "peanuts." Other nations were saying that it was dangerous—deadly dangerous—to be a friend of the United States. 
It was not just years of declining defense spending but a crisis in recruitment and retention and the outright cancellation of programs vital to our security. The Pentagon horror stories at the time were about ships that couldn't sail, planes that couldn't fly for lack of spare parts, and army divisions unprepared to fight. And it was not just a one-sided arms agreement that made it easy for one side to cheat but a treaty that actually permitted increases in nuclear arsenals. Even supporters of SALT II were demoralized, saying, "Well, the Soviets just won't agree to anything better." And when President Carter had to abandon the treaty because Senate leaders of his own party wouldn't support it, the United States was left without a national strategy for control of nuclear weapons. 
We knew immediate changes had to be made. So, here's what we did: We set out to show that the long string of governments falling under Communist domination was going to end, and we're doing it. In the 1970's one strategic country after another fell under the domination of the Soviet Union. The fall of Laos, Cambodia, and South Vietnam gave the Soviet Union a strategic position on the South China Sea. The invasion of Afghanistan cut nearly in half Soviet flying time to the Persian Gulf. Communist takeovers in South Yemen and Ethiopia put the Soviets astride the Red Sea, entryway to the Suez Canal. Pro-Soviet regimes in Mozambique and Angola strengthened the Soviet position in southern Africa. And finally, Grenada and Nicaragua gave Moscow two new beachheads right on the doorstep of the United States. 
In these last 5 years, not one square inch of territory has been lost, and Grenada has been set free. When we arrived in 1981, guerrillas in El Salvador had launched what they called their final offensive to make that nation the second Communist state on the mainland of North America. Many people said the situation was hopeless; they refused to help. We didn't agree; we did help. And today those guerrillas are in retreat. El Salvador is a democracy, and freedom fighters are challenging Communist regimes in Nicaragua, Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, and Ethiopia. 
We set out to show that the Western alliance could meet its security needs, despite Soviet intimidation, and we're doing it. Many said that to try to counter the Soviet SS-20 missiles would split NATO because Europe no longer believed in defending itself. Well, that was nonsense. Today Pershing and cruise missile deployments are on schedule, and our allies support the decision. 
We set out to narrow the growing gaps in our strategic deterrent, and we're beginning to do that. Our modernization program—the MX, the Trident submarine, the B-1 and Stealth bombers—represents the first significant improvement in America's strategic deterrent in 20 years. Those who speak so often about the so-called arms race ignore a central fact: In the decade before 1981, the Soviets were the only ones racing. 
Our message has gotten through. The Soviets used to contend that real reductions in nuclear missiles were out of the question. Now they say they accept the idea. Well, we shall see. Just this week, our negotiators presented a new plan for the elimination of intermediate-range nuclear missiles, and we're pressing the Soviets for cuts in other offensive forces as well. One thing is certain: If the Soviets truly want fair and verifiable agreements that reduce nuclear forces, we will have those agreements. 
But this didn't happen. Instead of a freeze, there was sharp cut, a cut of over 5 percent. And some are now saying that we need to chop another 20, 30, or even $50 billion out of national defense. This is reckless, dangerous, and wrong. It's backsliding of the most irresponsible kind, and you need to know about it. You, after all, paid the bill for all we've accomplished these past 5 years. But we still have a way to go. Millions of Americans actually believe that we are now superior to the Soviet Union in military power. Well, I'm sorry, but if our country's going to have a useful debate on national security, we have to get beyond the drumbeat of propaganda and get the facts on the table. 
Over the next few months, you'll be hearing this debate. I'd like you to keep in mind the two simple reasons not to cut defense now: one, it's not cheap; two, it's not safe. If we listen to those who would abandon our defense program, we will not only jeopardize negotiations with the Soviet Union; we may put peace itself at risk. 
Arbitrary cuts only bring phony savings, but there's a more important reason not to abandon our defense program. It's not safe. Almost 25 years ago, when John Kennedy occupied this office during the Cuban missile crisis, he commanded the greatest military power on Earth. Today we Americans must live with a dangerous new reality. Year in and year out, at the expense of its own people, the Soviet leadership has been making a relentless effort to gain military superiority over the United States. 
Between 1970 and 1985 alone, the Soviets invested $500 billion more than the United States in defense and built nearly three times as many strategic missiles. As a consequence of their enormous weapons investment, major military imbalances still exist between our two countries. Today the Soviet Union has deployed over 1 1/2 times as many combat aircraft as the United States, over 2 1/2 times as many submarines, over 5 times as many tanks, and over 11 times as many artillery pieces. 
We have begun to close some of these gaps, but if we're to regain our margins of safety, more must be done. Where the Soviets once relied on numbers alone, they now strive for both quantity and quality. We anticipate that over the next 5 years they will deploy on the order of 40 nuclear submarines, 500 new ballistic missiles, and 18,000 modern tanks. My 5-year defense budget maintains ourcommitment to America's rebuilding program. And I'm grateful that Secretary Weinberger is here to fight for that program with all the determination and ability he has shown in the past. 
But my budget does not callfor matching these Soviet increases. So one question must be asked: Can we really afford to do less than what I've proposed? Today we spend a third less of our gross national product on defense than under John Kennedy, yet some in Congress talk of even deeper cuts. Barely 6 percent of our nation's gross national product—that's all we invest to keep America free, secure, and at peace. The Soviets invest more than twice as much. But now strip away spending on salaries, housing, dependents, and the like and compare. The United States invests on actual weapons and research only 2.6 percent of our gross national product, while the Soviet Union invests 11 percent on weapons, more than 4 times as much. This is the hard, cold reality of our defense deficit. 
But it's not just the immense Soviet arsenal that puts us on our guard. The record of Soviet behavior, the long history of Soviet brutality toward those who are weaker, reminds us that the only guarantee of peace and freedom is our military strength and our national will. The peoples of Afghanistan and Poland, of Czechoslovakia and Cuba, and so many other captive countries—they understand this. 
Some argue that our dialog with the Soviets means we can treat defense more casually. Nothing could be farther from the truth. It was our seriousness about defense that created the climate in which serious talks could finally begin. Now that the Soviets are back at the table, we must not undercut our negotiators. Unfortunately, that's exactly what some Members of Congress have done. By banning any U.S. tests of antisatellite systems, Congress not only protected a Soviet monopoly, it unilaterally granted the Soviets a concession they could not win at the bargaining table. 
So, our defense program must rest on these principles. First, we must be smart about what we build. We don't have to copy everything the Soviets do. We don't have to compete on Soviet terms. Our job is to provide for our security by using the strengths of our free society. If we think smart enough, we don't have to think quite so big. We don't have to do the job with large numbers and brute force. We don't have to increase the size of our forces from 2 million to their 5 million as long as our military men and women have the quality tools they need to keep the peace. We don't have to have as many tanks as the Soviets as long as we have sophisticated antitank weapons. 
Innovation is our advantage. One example: Advances in making airplanes and cruise missiles almost invisible to Soviet radar could neutralize the vast air defense systems upon which the Soviets and some of their most dangerous client states depend. But innovation is not enough. We have to follow through. Blueprints alone don't deter aggression. We have to translate our lead in the lab to a lead in the field. But when our budget is cut, we can't do either. 
The fourth element of our strategy for the future is to reduce America's dependence on nuclear weapons. You've heard me talk about our Strategic Defense Initiative, the program that could one day free us all from the prison of nuclear terror. It would be pure folly for the United States not to press forward with SDI, when the Soviets have already invested up to 20 years on their own program. Let us not forget that the only operational missile defense in the world today guards the capital of the Soviet Union, not the United States. 
But while SDI offers hope for the future, we have to consider today's world. For too long, we and our allies have permitted nuclear weapons to be a crutch, a way of not having to face up to real defense needs. We must free ourselves from that crutch. Our goal should be to deter and, if necessary, to repel any aggression without a resort to nuclear arms. Here, again, technology can provide us with the means not only to respond to full-scale aggression but to strike back at terrorists without harming innocent civilians. Today's technology makes it possible to destroy a tank column up to 120 miles away without using atomic weapons. This technology may be the first cost-effective conventional defense in postwar history against the giant Red army. When we fail to equip our troops with these modernized systems, we only increase the risk that we may one day have to resort to nuclear weapons. 
These are the practical decisions we make when we send a defense budget to Congress. Each generation has to live with the challenges history delivers, and we can't cope with these challenges by evasion. If we sustain our efforts now, we have the best chance in decades of building a secure peace. That's why I met with General Secretary Gorbachev last year, and that's why we're talking to the Soviets today, bargaining—if Congress will support us—from strength. 
We want to make this a more peaceful world. We want to reduce arms. We want agreements that truly diminish the nuclear danger. We don't just want signing ceremonies and color photographs of leaders toasting each other with champagne. We want more. We want real agreements, agreements that really work, with no cheating. We want an end to state policies of intimidation, threats, and the constant quest for domination. We want real peace. 
I will never ask for what isn't needed; I will never fight for what isn't necessary. But I need your help. We've come so far together these last 5 years; let's not falter now. Let's maintain that crucial level of national strength, unity, and purpose that has brought the Soviet Union to the negotiating table and has given us this historic opportunity to achieve real reductions in nuclear weapons and a real chance at lasting peace. That would be the finest legacy we could leave behind for our children and for their children


Remarks at a White House Meeting for Supporters of United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance
March 3, 1986

The Nicaraguan democratic resistance, 40 percent former Sandinistas, now confronts new Soviet weapons, including the same helicopters used to massacre the resistance in Afghanistan. And democratic reconciliation remains possible if we support those who share our ideals. However, if we don't provide our friends with the means to stop these Soviet gunships, Nicaragua's freedom fighters will suffer the same fate as the Hungarian freedom fighters did 30 years ago, who had nothing to defend themselves against Soviet tanks

Now, I don't think any of us are going to try and sell the idea that just a little Nicaragua could represent a threat to the United States, but that isn't what they have in mind either. They have in mind being a launching pad for revolution up and down, first of all, Latin America. We have the definite proof that the Sandinista government continues to send arms to the guerrillas in El Salvador that are trying still to get rid of that democratic government that is now installed there. And can anyone imagine how much more help they would be able to give if once they were totally victorious and had no opposition within their own country anymore, and what they could do to unseat the neighboring democracies? I think it would place in jeopardy the survival of each of those small and fragile democracies now in Central America, open up the possibility of Soviet military bases on America's doorstep, could threaten the security of the Panama Canal, inaugurate a vast migration northward to the United States of hundreds of thousands of refugees. And those who would invite this strategic disaster by abandoning yet another fighting ally of this country in the field will be held fully accountable by history


Remarks to Jewish Leaders During a White House Briefing on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 5, 1986

The Prime Ministers of nine of the Caribbean island nations, when I was in Grenada just a week or two ago, told me that Nicaragua represented the greatest threat to their freedom and democracy—and they brought up the subject to me. They begged us to continue aiding the freedom fighters. Some still insist that the Sandinistas are only nationalists. The Sandinistas themselves laugh at the idea. They are true international Communists who talk of a revolution without borders and who have eagerly put their country at the disposal of Fidel Castro and the Soviet Union. 
Everyone who's thinking about this aid package should ask themselves one question: If the Sandinistas succeed in throwing the whole of Central America into turmoil, if the United States must contend with a growing number of hostile, aggressive Communist states close to its borders, how willing or able will we be able to meet ourcommitments to other allies? Our supply lines to Israel and our NATO allies run through the Caribbean. The Soviets are already banking on this fact. Even some in Congress would rather ignore it. Today Nicaragua is the focus of Soviet efforts at destabilization in the Western Hemisphere. 
If we show ourselves willing to abandon our friends so close to home, how soon before the Soviets turn their full attention to Israel, that lonely outpost of democracy in the Middle East? Freedom is indivisible. The moral foundation of our support for Israel is our support for freedom and democracy, and that support must always remain rock-solid wherever freedom and democracy are endangered. I want to assure you that I would not consider any measure, including arms sales to moderate Arab nations, if I thought it might endanger the security of Israel. A small, faraway country, some say, but all people that struggle for freedom are close to America's heart
We want to assure you, however, that we are not summer soldiers, and we know that you're not a summer soldier. The fight for human rights, for freedom in the Soviet Union, indeed, for freedom the world over will go on. We'll be there, and we know that you will be there leading us and helping us. I do want to say that we admire your defense of freedom and your condemnation of terrorism. Your eloquent plea for the contras, to support freedom and democracy in Central America, to preserve the ability to maintain a decent and balanced society, to keep Central America in freedom's camp, has touched many of us and will find residence in our community.
Recently there's been an intensive effort to discredit the democratic opposition in Nicaragua. Well, let me say a few words about disinformation. Some of us have been around long enough to know that disinformation has a long history. I remember the reports of Walter Duranty from Stalin's Russia, who denied the existence of the forced famine, even though he had witnessed firsthand Stalin's genocide. I remember Lincoln Steffens' famous remark when he returned from that land of slaughter and declared: "I have been over into the future, and it works." I remember Herbert Matthews' reports on Castro before he came to power, calling him a democrat and the hope of Cuba. And to some of you who are really too young to remember this, even people around our country were calling him the George Washington of Cuba, and George rolled over in his grave

And you've all been so nice; I can't leave without telling you one little goody. I happen to have a hobby of collecting stories that I understand are told in the Communist countries among themselves, which reveals the cynicism of their own people, And George Shultz brought me back one from the Soviet Union the other day. It seems they went into the General Secretary and told him there was an elderly lady there in the Kremlin who wouldn't leave without seeing him. And he said, "Well, bring her in." And they did. And he said, "Old Mother, what is it? What can I do?" She says, "I have one question." She said, "Was communism invented by a politician or a scientist?" And he said, "Well, a politician." She said, "That explains it. A scientist would have tried it on mice first." [Laughter]


Remarks at a White House Meeting With the House Republican Whip Organization on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 6, 1986

Even as we meet, Nicaragua's dictator is back in Havana meeting with Castro. And I think it's significant that Bayardo Arce, one of Nicaragua's nine commandantes, was the first foreigner asked to address the recent Soviet Party Congress. It's up to us to persuade the Members of Congress of what the consequences will be for Nicaragua, for Central America, and for the safety of our own country, if we fail to act. And that's what we propose to do, is act all-out for the next 2 weeks.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Announcing the Appointment of Philip C. Habib as Special Envoy for Central America 
March 7, 1986

Now there's another difficult job before us. We believe that the Nicaraguan people, just like the Filipino people, have theright to self-determination through democracy. And we in this administration and in Congress must now decide whether Nicaragua is to be the next staging ground for subversion, terrorism, and Soviet Communist expansion on our doorstep. And I want to emphasize today that there can be a diplomatic solution for Central America. It is the solution that will come when the Nicaraguan Communists finally agree to sit down and talk with their opposition, both armed and unarmed, to bring an end to the strife and the repression in their country


Radio Address to the Nation on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 8, 1986

I want to speak to you today about our request to help the Nicaraguan freedom fighters, which Congress should be voting on within the next 2 weeks. Let me say at the outset, this will be a vote of supreme importance. History will soon record whether the United States Congress, faced with a powerful Soviet-bloc challenge to capture Nicaragua and spread communism throughout Central America, stood by and watched or had the courage to stand up for freedom and America's security

Above all, only Nicaragua has become a wedge of aggression that intimidates and undermines its neighbors. Nicaragua's policy to foment violence was laid out at a secret meeting back in 1979 involving all military, intelligence, and security organizations, including the defense and secret police ministries headed by key Communists Humberto Ortega and Tomas Borge. Now this dictatorship becomes more dangerous as a flood of weapons and manpower pour in from the Soviet bloc and their coldblooded allies, the PLO and Libya. One thing alone unites these enemies of democracy: hatred for America and America's values. These men did not come to Central America to spread good will; these men came to do us harm, and they mean to succeed. As Qadhafi gloated: Supporting Nicaragua means a great thing; it means fighting America near its own borders. 
How can Congress ignore this storm gathering so close to our homeland? From amassing a military force larger than all other countries in the region to building the longest military airstrip in Central America-long enough to handle Soviet Backfire bombers—to being chief conduit of weapons to El Salvador's guerrillas, the radicals of Honduras, Costa Rica, Guatemala, and the terrorists who recently attacked the Palace of Justice in Colombia, Nicaragua today rivals Cuba as principal Communist warehouse and exporter of violence in our Western Hemisphere. 
Soviet Chairman Andrey Gromyko was once quoted as saying: "America's greatest weakness is its inability to understand the Soviet Union's final goals." He was right. Today some still question our honorable commitment to peace. Well, forgive me, but those questions should be directed to the Communists, not to the United States Government, to Nicaragua's dictator, who's been back in Havana again after the Cuban Third Party Congress vowed to defeat the United States and make communism victorious worldwide. It is the Nicaraguan Communists who dismissed all our efforts to promote internal dialog and who suspended talks with their neighbors, but we're still trying. 
Next week I'm sending Ambassador Habib to meet with President Duarte of El Salvador, who has offered to resume talks with the guerrillas in El Salvador if the Nicaraguan Communists begin simultaneous talks with the prodemocracy forces in that country. Yet if the freedom fighters get only Band-Aids from the United States, while Nicaraguans get helicopter gunships from the Soviets—the same death machines they're using to massacre the Afghan people—the Communists will feel no need to negotiate. Without power, diplomacy will be without leverage. 
My fellow Americans, the question is not whether we want peace in Central America. The question is: Will we meet a growing danger from the Soviets, East Germans, Bulgarians, North Koreans, Cubans, and PLO camped on our doorstep—a danger which already is disrupting peace in Central America and will soon imperil our own security? That is the question which must be answered within the next 2 weeks. Our policy can keep Central America free without committing American troops.



Remarks at a White House Briefing for Supporters of United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 10, 1986

Well, looking around this room today, I see a lot of Noahs when I'm talking about the Communist menace in Central America, so I don't think any of you need a long lecture on the realities at hand. This is an uphill battle in which we're engaged, but we're making progress. You can sense that the tide is turning in favor of the democratic resistance. Farsighted Democrats and Republicans are coming together in a realization of the common danger, and this is not some narrow partisan issue. It's a national security issue of paramount importance: whether the Soviet Union will be permitted to establish a subversive base camp and military beachhead on the mainland of North America. On this issue we mustact not as Republicans—or not as Democrats, but as Americans. As Scoop Jackson, who led the charge on Capitol Hill to save Central America, reminded us: "In matters of national security, the best politics is no politics." So, I think it's very important to put this current struggle in clear perspective, to realize that there is an exciting, hopeful dimension to it all.

I don't think there's anyone in this room who can forget the freedom fighters of 30 years ago. Who among us doesn't remember November 1956 and that last radio message from Budapest: "Civilized people of the world, in the name of liberty and solidarity, we are asking you to help. Our ship is sinking; the light vanishes. The shadows grow darker from hour to hour. Listen to our cry. Start moving. Extend to us brotherly hands. People of the world, save us. SOS. Help, help, help. God be with you and with us." That tragic plea could not be answered. That was when the tanks rolled down the streets—the Soviet tanks—in Hungary and crushed that revolution.


Remarks at a Dinner for the Republican Congressional Leadership 
March 10, 1986

The people who created the mess still cannot bring themselves to admit that the culprit that wreaked such havoc and hardship on our people was their very own policies. I think America's spectacular rebound underscores that our country wasn't suffering from tired blood in the late 1970's. It was suffering from tired ideas—wrong ideas. The liberals attribute all the success we've had in the last 5 years to luck, global trends, and the celestial effects of Halley's Comet— [laughter] —anything and everything except the real source of our progress. The reason things have turned around is that we have come at the problems facing America with a fundamentally different philosophy than what preceded us. Liberals called on government to play an ever-increasing role in the lives of our people. They relied on central planning, regulations, and bureaucracy. Is there any doubt about why our country in the late 1970's seemed to be humming along with all the efficiency of a Bulgarian shoe factory? [Laughter] If central planning were the way to a better world, we'd be importing our grain from the Soviet Union and not the other way around

Experience suggests that government needs to operate within well-defined limits. The original purpose of our Constitution was not to give government power but to protect liberty by limiting the power of government. I've read a great many of the constitutions of other countries, other democracies, and also the Constitution of the Soviet Union. Even in that one, I found many things that are in our own. They don't observe it, of course— [laughter] —but they're in there. But where lies the difference in these constitutions—and I've taken great pleasure in telling this to student audiences-all those other constitutions say, "We, the Government, allow you, the people, the following privileges," and so forth. Ours says, "We, the people, allow the Government the following powers, and they have no other powers than those that are listed here, given to them by our permission."


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 11, 1986

Today Radio Catolica, the voice of the Catholic Church, has been silenced; and Cardinal Obando y Bravo, primate of Nicaragua, has said: "We want to state clearly that this government is totalitarian. We are dealing with an enemy of the Church." La Prensa, the last independent newspaper, is subject to constant censorship and often violent threats. The Communists have driven the Jewish community from the country and persecuted the Miskito Indians, killing and imprisoning thousands of these gentle people. Soviet, East German, Libyan, PLO, Cuban troops and advisers swarm over the country in the thousands. Corruption in the regime has become blatant. Last October Commandante Ortega pulled up to a Manhattan optician's shop in a 17-car motorcade to spend $3,500 on designer glasses for himself, his wife, and his daughter. The Sandinistas, faced with internal unrest and disaffection, have responded to the cries of repression by the Nicaraguan people by building nine new prisons; Somoza had only one

Well, they are the principal suppliers, I've said, of the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador, and what they did in Colombia—we have seen that and the great tragedy there. Hundreds of terrorists with clear ties to Nicaragua are now located in countries throughout Central and South America. Sandinista military units regularly cross the Nicaraguan border, intimidating their neighbors in hopes of promoting unrest. Have the people in so many of these countries struggled to reemerge into the light of democracy only to be confronted with Soviet-backed efforts to subvert their new governments and snuff out their resurgent liberty? 
Now Nicaragua, this Soviet satellite on our own continent, threatens the national interests of the United States. In purely military terms, Nicaragua's military bases could be used for strikes against our Caribbean sealanes, avenues that bear roughly half our foreign trade and half our oil imports; but the graver risk arises from the threat that the Communists will continue to spread violence and unrest among their neighbors. Refugees—millions of them-would stream toward our borders, and for States like Florida and Texas, this flood would make the Mariel boatlift look like a trickle. In time, the United States could be forced to surrender Central America to the Soviet sphere. 
Today the opposition, the brave Nicaraguan freedom fighters, numbers over 20,000 and has the growing support of the Nicaraguan people. To give the freedom fighters the help they need in countering their Soviet-equipped opponents, I've asked the Congress to vote them $100 million in aid of already appointed funds, a modest amount when compared to what the Soviets are providing the Sandinistas. And make that point clear there: This is not new money that's going to add to the deficit. This is money already appropriated that is going to be redirected to this effort. Just how effective this aid to the freedom fighters would be becomes clear in considering their past support. The Soviet bloc gave the Nicaraguan Communists over $500 million in aid. But last year we provided the freedom fighters with less than $27 million in boots and Band-Aids. What happened? The freedom fighters have been battered. You can't defend yourself against Soviet helicopter gunships with bedrolls. But even at that, the freedom fighters were able to use mobility and surprise to keep the Sandinista forces largely on the defensive. 
Now, we need to provide the aid we've requested, this time military as well as humanitarian, to see the ranks of the freedom fighters swell and their victories mount, forcing the Sandinistas to come to the table at last. In the last few days there's been talk here in Washington of compromise on this issue: smaller amounts of aid, delay in providing it, restrictions on the uses to which it could be put—all the usual temporizing and quibbles. Well, let me set the record straight. The Soviets continue to fund the Nicaraguan Communists with massive infusions of arms, cash, and so-called advisers. To delay or reduce the aid we've requested for the freedom fighters could be to send too little, too late. Those who would compromise must not compromise the freedom fighters' lives nor their immediate defensive needs. They must not compromise Latin America's democracies or our own southern borders. They must not compromise freedom

The President. Well, I hadn't used it. But let me just suggest where there is one difference. The domino theory was expressed as a theory of what could happen with regard to the Vietnam situation. But here, we have firm evidence. We have the documents that were seized in Grenada, documents from the Soviet Union; documents from the Cuban Government to their counterparts there in Grenada and outlining the future plans and naming the future targets. And many of those documents began with the gloating sentences: "We now have Cuba and Nicaragua and Grenada..." and then went on to where the other targets are. So, the dominoes have already been named by the people who are going to tip them over. But I would like to also say-and with all respect—before we start sneering at those who threatened dominoes, the North Vietnamese are now at the border of Thailand, and the dominoes did begin to fall

The President. No, they haven't. And our own polls indicate that there is a great feeling and many people saying what are we doing in that little country, and where is it and so forth. I think that a great many people—there's a lack of understanding, and that's why I'm going on the air Sunday night. But also there is a great disinformation network that is at work throughout our country, and it's a custom that was established by the Soviet Union. And a great many people are confused. They think, for example, the message has been that—what are we doing backing revolutionaries who are trying to overthrow a legitimate government? Well, there's nothing legitimate about the Sandinista government at all. After a revolution against Somoza, they took over at the point of a gun, they ousted the revolutionaries who didn't agree with them. They have had one so-called election, if you could call it that. They wouldn't let anyone run against them, and they wouldn't allow campaigning. And then they said they'd done their democratic duty and came to New York to buy those designer glasses. So it isn't an established or a legitimate government. But the American people—Thomas Jefferson said if the American people know all the facts, they will never make a mistake. And I think we haven't completed the job of letting the American people know all the facts. And we're sure going to try to do that.


Interview With Representatives of the Baltimore Sun 
March 12, 1986

Let me point out something that everyone is neglecting up there on the Hill to pay attention to. When we, in the Grenada operation, got possession of all those documents, as well as the arms and the weapons that were already installed in Grenada by the Soviet bloc, we got documents from the Soviet Government, from the Cuban Government addressed to the Communists there in Grenada. And over and over again they referred to that they had Cuba, they had Nicaragua, they had Grenada, and then they went on to discuss what the future goals were and the other targets there in Central America and the Caribbean. So that there was no question about this being a target for Soviet expansionism, using proxies the way they have now with Cuba and all. So the goal is made very plain. Now, this last—again, this threat that a Nicaragua could pose, when I was in Grenada the nine Prime Ministers of the tiny Caribbean island nations unanimously—and they brought it up, I wasn't even discussing this subject. They brought it up to me. They said, "You must continue helping the rebels in Nicaragua because this Nicaragua, under this government, is the greatest threat to our existence, to those nine nations." So, we're not the only ones that see this as a cancer that must be excised

The President. Well, yes. So far we have not heard—or I have not certainly heard of anything from the General Secretary. But remember, this isn't like an Embassy where there is retaliation or—this is the one place, the United Nations—and it's the only one, and it is here in our country. And they have a delegation that is larger than the next two delegations, to them put together. And there's no way that you can justify the size of their delegation here except that they have other goals than just the— 
The President. Yes, and I think that we have enough knowledge of their actions to know that they're there for that purpose-for other purposes and for espionage, not for the doings of the United Nations. 
The President. No, this project has been on our minds for quite some time. The arms talks—I still continue to be hopeful because the General Secretary in his proposals—this is the first time I can recall any Soviet leader actually being willing to eliminate weapons they already have. And we in turn accepted a great many of their figures and their proposals, but there were—it's a complicated thing because we don't both have the same numbers of the same kinds of weapons, and so we then put in some-taking their proposal in which, as I say, in overall terms: 50-percent reduction, ultimate elimination, and so forth—we accepted. We put in some other things that we thought were essential to such a program, and there were no further negotiations. 
In other words, they have, at the moment, seem to be in a position in which we accept their offer entirely or else. And we think that negotiations mean that you try to find a common meeting ground on some differences that you may have in there on figures. And we have not had a response. We put before our people there in Geneva the framework for meeting their proposal and with some changes that we felt should be made because of fairness and expediting the program, and we've had no response. 
The President. Well, we didn't come home with any euphoria or anything from that meeting. We did come home pleased with the fact that they had agreed and shown an agreement to have future meetings. We don't think that's been done away with. But also, we've had people over there—Charlie Wick has had people with him over there on the matter of exchange, cultural exchange and youth exchange, and all of this. And apparently they were better meetings than we've ever had in the past with them. He met with officials at extremely high levels. They were most enthusiastic about wanting to go forward with these exchanges, so—and the fact that I have a communications channel to the General Secretary. No, I think that the conditions are better than they had been before. 
The President. I have to say his willingness and his eagerness to have us come there in the following year leads me to believe that nothing has changed on that. With regard to arms control, yes, because I think he is very much aware of the economic situation in his country and the part that their massive military buildup has played in that economic problem. And I think that he would much prefer to have practical arms agreements, arms reduction agreements, rather than to face a continued arms race. 
The President. No, I haven't asked for that kind of a deadline. We've made it plain to them that it would be very difficult, inconvenient for us to—the one hint that was put out by them of possibly September or later—well, we have an election in our country. Now, I know they don't understand our elections as much as they should, not having free elections of their own. But we've explained that it must be earlier, before we actually get into the full extent of that election campaign. 
The President. I don't—we haven't—I suppose, but by that time we're getting pretty late in the year. We'd listen to that and look at it. I hadn't thought about anything after that time. 
The President. Or July, yeah. 
The President. We haven't sat down actually with regard to theirs and what our response would be. But this one, on this one, this only has to deal with the SALT II. 
The President. The other thing, the nuclear test ban, this one, we're willing to meet them on that except that we can't get a satisfactory answer yet on real verification. Now, we have offered to let them come here with whatever equipment they wanted to bring and be witness to one of our underground tests. This is a treaty where we think they have been in violation. It's rather difficult to determine from the great distance whether they've exceeded the agreement on the size of the explosion. And we would want better verification before we go forward with some of these.


Remarks at an Exhibit of Weapons Captured in Central America 
March 13, 1986

The regime which has built—now, I was going to say 9, but now I've been corrected, it is 10—new prisons in Nicaragua and runs drugs to poison our children is backed by an extraordinary support network of international Communists. One doesn't need to be of a particular party or even privy to secret information to see what's happening in Central America. It's clear: Nicaraguan Communists are using their country as a staging area for aggression against their neighbors, while totally subjugating their own people. Their campaign of internal repression and external aggression is being aided and abetted by the Soviet Union, Cuba, East Germany, Bulgaria, Iran, Vietnam, Libya, and other radical states, movements, and organizations


