MID 223201, US v USSR, 23 Jan to 22-Feb-85 to 7-Sep-85




Remarks at the Western Hemisphere Legislative Leaders Forum 
January 24, 1985

Our efforts are guided by three consistent and mutually reinforcing goals: We seek to promote the development of democratic political institutions; we want to encourage economic growth, which will increase opportunity and improve the standard of living for people throughout the hemisphere; we're willing to help our friends defend themselves against Soviet bloc, Cuban, and Nicaraguan sponsored subversion

The transition to democracy, especially in Central America, has been accompanied by a concerted and well-financed effort by the Soviet bloc and Cuba to undermine democratic institutions and to seize power from those who believe in democracy. This is nothing new. Venezuelans who struggled so long and hard for freedom faced this same threat as they transformed their country into a democracy. Similar subversion financed, armed, and supported by the outside—has plagued Colombia and other countries, as well.


Interview With Representatives of Independent Radio Networks 
January 26, 1985


I, on the other hand, tend to be a little more optimistic, not euphoric. I, too, know how tough this is going to be. But, at least, it is the first time that I can recall the Soviet Union openly, themselves, saying that they wanted to see the number of weapons reduced, and have even gone so far as to say what we have said, that they would like to see the elimination of nuclear weapons entirely. 
The President. Well, we're certainly going to try. I know that I wouldn't try to confine it to 4 years, because I know how long some negotiations have taken with them. But we're going to stay there at the table, with the hope that this time we can arrive at an actual reduction of weapons.
The President. Well, on the first part of that I can only say that we know no more than you have just said about this—that there are voices, and some from within Russia, that have indicated to others in conversation that perhaps his illness is quite serious. I don't know whether that would have an effect on these talks or not. The very fact that they're going forward with them, that after 17 days of the month that was given to setting a date and so forth, they've come forth with a date and named their negotiators, would lead me to believe that, no, they intend to go forward


The President. No. What he's talking about is the fact that, as we continue with our Trident submarines, we are approaching a point at which, if we abide completely by the SALT II agreement, we would then have to find other weapons to eliminate. We have eliminated some in going forward with this, and we've run out of, I think, of the particular weapon that we were eliminating—that we'll have to do that, or discuss whether we actually go above. And, in that regard, we have to take into consideration that the Soviet Union has, we believe, not stayed within the limits. 
Now, do we want to join them in that and forget the whole idea, or do we want to talk to them about going forward. But we haven't made a decision because, and I say, that's down the road aways, and it's a few Trident submarines away from where we are now


Remarks to Congressional Leaders During a White House Briefing on the Fiscal Year 1986 Budget
February 4, 1985

The defense of our nation is the one budget item which cannot be dictated solely by domestic considerations. Despite severe constraints on our budget, we must respond to the unprecedented military buildup of the Soviet Union, the largest military buildup in world history. And, unfortunately, we've had to start from a weakened position, brought on by long years of neglect and underfunding, and we still have a ways to go.


Remarks to Business and Trade Representatives During a White House Briefing on the Fiscal Year 1986 Budget 
February 4, 1985

The defense of our nation is the one budget item which cannot be dictated by domestic considerations. Despite severe constraints on our budget, we must respond to the unprecedented military buildup of the Soviet Union, the largest military buildup in world history. Unfortunately, we had to start from a weakened position, brought on by long years of neglect and underfunding, and we still have a ways to go. 
You might be interested to know that the Scriptures are on our side in this—Luke 14:31, in which Jesus in talking to the disciples spoke about a king who might be contemplating going to war against another king, with his 10,000 men. But he sits down and counsels how good he's going to do against the other fellow's 20,000 and then says he may have to send a delegation to talk peace terms. Well, I don't think we ever want to be in a position of only being half as strong and having to send a delegation to negotiate under those circumstances-peace terms—with the Soviet Union. So, ultimately, our security and our hopes for success at the arms reduction talks hinge on the determination that we show here to continue our program to rebuild and refortify our defenses.



Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union 
February 6, 1985

Since 1981 we've been committed to seeking fair and verifiable arms agreements that would lower the risk of war and reduce the size of nuclear arsenals. Now our determination to maintain a strong defense has influenced the Soviet Union to return to the bargaining table. Our negotiators must be able to go to that table with the united support of the American people. All of us have no greater dream than to see the day when nuclear weapons are banned from this Earth forever. 
Each Member of the Congress has a role to play in modernizing our defenses, thus supporting our chances for a meaningful arms agreement. Your vote this spring on the Peacekeeper missile will be a critical test of ourresolve to maintain the strength we need and move toward mutual and verifiable arms reductions. 
For the past 20 years we've believed that no war will be launched as long as each side knows it can retaliate with a deadly counterstrike. Well, I believe there's a better way of eliminating the threat of nuclear war. It is a Strategic Defense Initiative aimed ultimately at finding a nonnuclear defense against ballistic missiles. It's the most hopeful possibility of the nuclear age. But it's not very well understood. 
Some say it will bring war to the heavens, but its purpose is to deter war in the heavens and on Earth. Now, some say the research would be expensive. Perhaps, but it could save millions of lives, indeed humanity itself. And some say if we build such a system, the Soviets will build a defense system of their own. Well, they already have strategic defenses that surpass ours; a civil defense system, where we have almost none; and a research program covering roughly the same areas of technology that we're now exploring. And finally some say the research will take a long time. Well, the answer to that is: Let's get started
We must stand by all our democratic allies. And we must not break faith with those who are risking their lives—on every continent, from Afghanistan to Nicaragua—to defy Soviet-supported aggression and secure rights which have been ours from birth. 
The Sandinista dictatorship of Nicaragua, with full Cuban-Soviet bloc support, not only persecutes its people, the church, and denies a free press, but arms and provides bases for Communist terrorists attacking neighboring states. Support for freedom fighters is self-defense and totally consistent with the OAS and U.N. Charters. It is essential that the Congress continue all facets of our assistance to Central America. I want to work with you to support the democratic forces whose struggle is tied to our own security



Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Robert Hawke of Australia 
February 7, 1985

On regional issues, we reaffirmed our strong belief in cooperation among Pacific States to maintain secure, prosperous, and democratic societies. Prime Minister Hawke and I agreed that strength and unity of purpose will give the West the leverage it needs to achieve effective and verifiable arms reductions with the Soviet Union


Interview With a Group of Senior Executives and Staff Members From the Wall Street Journal 
February 7, 1985

But they have set up a totalitarian government. They've made it plain: Their allies are Cuba, the Soviet Union, the Communist bloc, even Mr. Qadhafi, and now Iran is getting into the picture. But they've set up a totalitarian government. They have betrayed the principles that the people of Nicaragua were fighting for. And what we think is that we should be on the side of those people who actually are only asking for the democracy that they'd fought a revolution to get

The President. Well, I'm not going to be euphoric about this, but I do think that one of the things we have going for us at this time, that hasn't been present in much of our previous negotiations, is that we go to the table now in a situation in which you're not going there looking at the Soviets as if, "Well, they're people just like us, and maybe if we talk sweetly enough, why they will be conned into being nice, too." No. The only way you're ever going to succeed in negotiations is if you can go there with a situation in which it is to their practical interest also, that their interests are served by coming to an agreement. 
And I think the fact that we go there now with our own military buildup, with them seeing that the alternative to legitimate arms reduction could very well be an arms race with an industrial power that they know they cannot match; in other words, we're saying to them, "We're not going to let you get a monopoly on power to the point that you can start winning by simple ultimatums—threats of, 'Surrender, or die'—so make up your mind. You either join in a legitimate reduction in which both of us will reduce in such a way that neither one of us represents a threat to the other, or you face that kind of a race." 
It was all summed up in a cartoon. I know your paper doesn't have cartoons, but— 
The President. Sort of—all right. But a cartoon one day and it—right back early on in our military rebuilding—and it was two Russian generals, and one of them was saying to the other, "I liked the arms race better when we were the only ones in it." And I think that's been the situation over a number of years. 
Now, that isn't really the goal of the Strategic Defense Initiative. I tie that to what I think is the goal of these arms negotiations. The Soviet Union—Chernenko and Gromyko both have publicly stated that they would like to see the elimination, ultimately, of nuclear weapons. All right, they've said it. That's what our goal is. 
Now, if they really mean it, we can go to a table and sit down and start negotiating reductions, aiming toward the elimination of those weapons. If they don't mean it—or either way—I think that to go forward with this research on a strategic weapon is hand in hand with that goal, that ultimate goal. If you could have that kind of a defense in which they would have to say: "Well, wait a minute. How many missiles would we have to build to get enough through on a first attack that we wouldn't be threatened with, then, the retaliation?" And then they will see the value that this is what I mean by making nuclear weapons obsolete—they'll see that this defensive weapon could be a contributing factor to eliminating such weapons. 
If we come up with such a weapon, we're not going to stand there and say: "Okay, now we've got you. We can launch the first attack." I don't think this country is ever in a position where it wants to do that. We don't start wars. We have no intention of starting one now. But what we would then be able to say to them is: "Look, we're willing to join you. We'll do away with ours. You do away with yours. We've got this thing here now, this defensive weapon, and we're very willing to use this, not to enable us to fight you, but to simply do what we both want, and that is get rid of the weapons


Interview With Bernard Weinraub and Gerald Boyd of the New York Times 
February 11, 1985

The President. That we are not up to a strength level of the Soviet Union— 
This time, with the refurbishing of our military defenses that we've been undergoing for these 4 years, we're going to the table, and they have the knowledge that not only are we stronger than we were, even though we have not caught up with them as yet, but they have the awareness that we're determined to notallow them to have a superiority over us to the extent that our forces wouldn't be a deterrent. And I think in that regard, we sit down to the table with a little more realism than there's been in the past. 
The President. Well, I was trying to be completely accurate here that, obviously, we have not completely caught up with the imbalance between us. For example, we have in uniform in the military 17 divisions. Well, they've got more than that on the Chinese border. So, we have not caught up with the naval buildup. But the fact that we are doing that, the fact that we have 24 more ships, I believe, out there scheduled for addition to the fleet; that is what I think brings us to the table. They know our industrial power. They know what we've been able to achieve when we set our minds to it. 
So, they know that there's been a change of attitude, that we are not canceling weapons systems without getting anything in return. And, from that standpoint, I think this is what they mean—that our whole attitude is different now, and they can look down the road and see that there's a point at which they won't have any margin of superiority. 
The President. And they don't have enough of a margin today to tempt them into a first strike. 
The President. Well, I think all of that is part of what has to be negotiated and probably under the cap of—or the part of the negotiations that'll deal with verifiability. In other words, it's not enough to have an agreement; it's got to be a verifiable agreement. 
And some of the violations that they're doing are violations of what had previously been negotiated as the right of each one of us to know about the other. The encrypting of the signals that some of their nuclear tests—ordinarily that we would be able, simply electronically, to have the facts that it was agreed upon we should have, both sides should have. But then they have been encrypting so that we don't get that full information from a test. And all of these will be part of the negotiations. 
The President. Now we get into the area of the actual negotiating, and I don't think that I should be discussing those particular facets of what are we going to do, what are we going to offer, what are we going to trade. I don't think that should be voiced in advance
The President. No. I would want to proceed with what we're doing, which is research to discover whether there is such a weapon and whether it is practical and feasible. And then I, myself, have said that my own view would be that if that is determined and we can produce such a weapon, that then before deployment I'd be willing to sit down and, in a sense, internationalize. 
In other words, to negotiate then, before there would be any deployment or anything, to make sure that they understood that we weren't trying to create the ability of a first strike ourselves, that our goal was still the elimination of nuclear weapons; and that I would see that defensive weapon as another step in attaining that goal; that if we could say that this virtually makes those weapons, if not obsolete, certainly most ineffective—the nuclear weapons—then we've got a real reason for saying, "Now, let's all do away with them, because we've come up with this defensive weapon." That would eliminate any of the protests that some of the people on the Soviet side have made that we're seeking a first-strike capability. 
I don't think anyone in the world can honestly believe that the United States is interested in such a thing or ever would put itself in that position. 
The President. That's right— 
The President.—because it's not in violation of the ABM treaty, and they have been conducting—you know, who are they kidding? They've been conducting research in this sort of thing for a long time. And they already have—far beyond anything we have—and we believe, in violation of the ABM treaty, that kind of defense. 
And we're seeking a nonnuclear weapon that could render these weapons obsolete
But I feel that we have to make the moderate Arab States recognize that we can be their friend as well as the friend of Israel and that this could be helpful in our trying to be of help in peace negotiations. And part of this would be—because they're under threat—there's a war going on just minutes away from them by air. The Soviet Union, with its invasion of Afghanistan, has made it evident that the Middle East can notruleout the possibility of expansionism on the part of the Soviets there. And, therefore, we think that they're entitled to some defensive weapons also



Informal Exchange With Reporters 
February 13, 1985
The President. Well, there are a number of things that I think are of interest to both countries, and I think we'll—there's some reason to believe that we can straighten out some things, matters



Radio Address to the Nation on Central America 
February 16, 1985

One of the most inspiring developments of recent years is the move against communism and toward freedom that is sweeping the world. In the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, we see the dissidents; in Poland, the Solidarity movement. We see freedom fighters in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Cambodia, and Angola. These brave men and women are fighting to undo the infamous Brezhnev doctrine, which says that once a nation falls into the darkness of Communist tyranny, it can never again see the light of freedom. 
Nowhere do we see this more than in Nicaragua, whose Sandinista government is a Marxist-Leninist clique that broke the hearts of the freedom-loving people of their country by imposing a brutal dictatorship soon after taking control in 1979. Functioning as a satellite of the Soviet Union and Cuba, they moved quickly to suppress internal dissent, clamp down on a free press, persecute the church and labor unions, and betray their pledge to hold free elections. Now they're exporting drugs to poison our youth and linking up with the terrorists of Iran, Libya, the Red Brigades, and the PLO. The Sandinistas aren't democrats, but Communists; not lovers of freedom, but of power; not builders of a peaceful nation, but creators of a fortress Nicaragua that intends to export communism beyond its borders.



Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of the United Kingdom 
February 20, 1985

We discussed East-West relations, and in particular the preparations for the upcoming Geneva talks with the Soviets. We fully agree that the unity, patience, and determination of the North Atlantic alliance are essential if arms control negotiations are to succeed. 
What we're seeking are significant reductions in the numbers of nuclear weapons through fair and verifiable agreements. Prime Minister Thatcher and I agree that it's absolutely necessary to continue NATO's INF deployments on schedule, in accord with the alliance's 1979 decision. 
We're both hopeful that the dialog opening in Geneva will result in progress. And while that progress continues, however, we will be steadfast in the modernization of our forces and in our determination to promote full adherence to existing arms control agreements. These are crucial incentives to any real progress.



Toasts of the President and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of the United Kingdom at a Dinner at the British Embassy 
February 20, 1985

In foreign affairs we and our NATO allies have stayed strong, while demonstrating our openness to genuine arms reductions. And Prime Minister Thatcher, I know you share my satisfaction that the Soviets have agreed to return to the bargaining table. And now we must press on together for success in mutual and verifiable arms reductions and a more secure peace


The President's News Conference
February 21, 1985
The President. Helen, [Helen Thomas, United Press International], I read that myself this morning, and I went into the office and I said, "Where is all this coming from?" I do not remember any statement from the Soviet Union of that kind. 
Both countries had been involved with obeying the restraints or staying within the restraints mainly because of our efforts toward what we're now approaching, arms reduction talks; that we felt that if we were going to engage in those talks, it would be even better if we did abide by an agreement—one that had been signed, but never been ratified by our government. 
And I don't recall that at all. And I have to say that we know that the Soviet Union, we're sure, has violated some of the restraints now. And we know that we're coming to a point at which we have, up until now, been biding by it. And as we replace older weapons with new, we have destroyed the older ones. 
The Soviet Union—one of the violations of theirs has been that they were taking nuclear missile submarines out of action, but they were cutting them down and rebuilding them as cruise missiles carrying submarines— 
The President. Well, we're going to stay with the treaties that are in effect, that have been ratified and are in power. We'll have a— 
The President. We'll have a decision several months from now to make with regard to whether we join them in violating the restraints
The President. No, Ralph. These talks had nothing to do with negotiations or anything of that kind. We simply felt that it was time to exchange views with each other and make sure that there couldn't be any miscalculations that could lead to some kind of confrontation or problem. 
We brought them up to date on our own views and what we thought, and they were talking on their own, and that's all. 
The President. I haven't had a full report enough to say whether they mentioned some specific things. They have tended to support the idea of a great international meeting. We don't favor that. We don't believe that there should be that many hands in the pot, just as we're not envisioning any participation in negotiations. We have said we'll stand by and we'll help in any way we can, but these negotiations must be between the Arabs and the Palestinians and the Israelis
The President. We believe if the Soviets are sincere in the statements they've made about actually wanting a reduction and even the elimination of nuclear weapons, they'll stay at the table and negotiate with us. All that we have proposed and all that we're doing is engaging in research, which is legal within the ABM treaty—we're not violating that treaty. 
And I have said repeatedly, and Prime Minister Thatcher is aware of this, that if our research does produce the possibility of such a weapon, a defensive weapon that could alter the balance, then I would be willing to come forth before any deployment and negotiate and discuss the deployment and the use of that weapon in such a way that it would be used to rid the world of the nuclear threat, not to give us any particular advantage over anyone else. 
We just think that the ABM treaty itself-this is one part that has been violated—the ABM treaty in being passed, being a defensive weapon treaty, expressed the belief that this should then be accompanied by realistic reductions of nuclear weapons. And all there has been since the treaty was passed was a tremendous increase in those weapons


Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the National Association of Independent Schools 
February 28, 1985

As Prime Minister Thatcher told the Congress this month, it wasn't Soviet good will that brought the Soviets back to the bargaining table; it was American strength. So it is that, as we begin this second term, I believe we face an historic challenge. We have the chance to prepare America, not just for the next 4 years or the next decade, but for the 21st century. And together, we can keep America moving toward that first shining vision—a land of golden opportunity, where achievement is limited only by how big we dream, how hard we work, and how well we learn

In Japan advanced coursework in mathematics and science starts in elementary school. So Japan, with a population only about half the size of ours, graduates about as many engineers as we do. In the Soviet Union students learn the basic concepts of algebra and geometry in elementary school. Compared to the United States, the Soviet Union graduates from college more than three times as many specialists in engineering. Itistime to put an end to this learning gap by insisting that all American students become fully conversant with science and math, as well as history, reading, and writing


Remarks at the Annual Dinner of the Conservative Political Action Conference 
March 1, 1985

But the domestic side isn't the only area where we need your help. All of us in this room grew up, or came to adulthood, in a time when the doctrine of Marx and Lenin was coming to divide the world. Ultimately, it came to dominate remorselessly whole parts of it. The Soviet attempt to give legitimacy to its tyranny is expressed in the infamous Brezhnev doctrine, which contends that once a country has fallen into Communist darkness, it can never again be allowed to see the light of freedom. 
There's much more to do. Throughout the world the Soviet Union and its agents, client states, and satellites are on the defensive—on the moral defensive, the intellectual defensive, and the political and economic defensive. Freedom movements arise and assert themselves. They're doing so on almost every continent populated by man-in the hills of Afghanistan, in Angola, in Kampuchea, in Central America. In making mention of freedom fighters, all of us are privileged to have in our midst tonight one of the brave commanders who lead the Afghan freedom fighters—Abdul Haq. Abdul Haq, we are with you. 
Now, I am against sending troops to Central America. They are simply not needed. Given a chance and the resources, the people of the area can fight their own fight. They have the men and women. They're capable of doing it. They have the people of their country behind them. All they need is our support. All they need is proof that we care as much about the fight for freedom 700 miles from our shores as the Soviets care about the fight against freedom 5,000 miles from theirs. And they need to know that the U.S. supports them with more than just pretty words and good wishes. We need your help on this, and I mean each of you-involved, active, strong, and vocal. And we need more. 
SDI has been criticized on the grounds that it might upset any chance of an arms control agreement with the Soviets. But SDI is arms control. If SDI is, say, 80 percent effective, then it will make any Soviet attack folly. Even partial success in SDI would strengthen deterrence and keep the peace. And if our SDI research is successful, the prospects for real reduction in U.S. and Soviet offensive nuclear forces will be greatly enhanced. 
It is said that SDI would deal a blow to the so-called East-West balance of power. Well, let's think about that. The Soviets already are investing roughly as much on strategic defenses as they are on their offensive nuclear forces. This could quickly tip the East-West balance if we had no defense of our own. Would a situation of comparable defenses threaten us? No, for we're not planning on being the first to use force. 


Interview With Morton Kondracke and Richard H. Smith of Newsweek Magazine 
March 4, 1985

The President. They will find out very quickly that it isn't because—no, what we're doing is not prevented by any treaty—research, there it is. And even Mr. Gromyko himself admitted not too long ago that research—that there's no one who could know whether you're researching or not-there's no way to prevent that. We know that they've been on this kind of research themselves; they've probably been at it for a while longer than we have. 
The President. Yes. You know, all of this reminds me—all these things, I hear them and these protests about them. And it reminds me of that wonderful cartoon, not too long ago, where the man was sitting watching the TV screen and from the TV the voice was coming out saying that it would never work, that it was too expensive, that you couldn't do it. And his wife was just leaving the room, passing through behind him, and she said, "Well, then why don't the Russians want us to have it?" 
The President. Because there's another and a better answer, and they themselves have voiced it. We're going to Geneva and both Gromyko and Chernenko—maybe others, I don't know about them; but at least these two on several occasions lately have said that their purpose, their goal is the total elimination of nuclear weapons. Now, we'll accept that goal and strive with them to meet that goal. And it seems to me that this, if it developed, could be an aid in bringing that about. 
Just suppose today that we were able to say, "We have discovered a thing that now can make it very difficult, if not impossible, to get a nuclear weapon through to the target." Well, then, wouldn't you sit down in Geneva and say, "Well, there's just another reason why we ought to do away with these things." 
The President. No, the MX is not a bargaining chip in the sense of we'd need something to give away—not at all. This is a long-overdue modernization, and modernization in all of the treaties, including the one not signed, SALT II, has been recognized. We are sitting here with our landbased missiles outdated by anything and any comparison with the Soviet Union. They have come up with at least four new weapon systems, all superior in accuracy and megatonnage than our Minuteman missiles. And, as you know, some years ago we even shut down the Minuteman assembly line. We don't even have anything with which to build them. So, here is a weapon that is very definitely needed until and unless we come to a total elimination of weapons. 
Even if we came to a build-down, which we're going to optimistically hope we will on the way to the other elimination, this modernization would certainly be in keeping with everything they've done. They say they've come up with at least four systems; they're now testing a couple of additional ones. So, modernizing—that is valid until we decide we don't need weapons at all. So, in the sense of a bargaining chip—no. But where it is valuable at Geneva is if suddenly we're told by the Congress, for example, that we can't have this modernized weapon. The fellows on the other side of the table who have already done their research, who already have all these new weapon systems and some of them bigger, more powerful, and certainly just as accurate and with as many warheads as the MX—they sit there and say, "Why do we have to give up anything?" They have such a superiority. 
The President. Oh, no. I just say this about the MX: I can't guarantee that if we build the MX we will get the kind of a reduction agreement that we want, but I believe I can guarantee you that if we don't get it, we won't get an agreement. 
The President. Well, as I say, we're talking nothing but research. And I have made it plain, come deployment time if the research yields such a weapon, come deployment, then you sit down. You don't hoard it and say, "Ah, we're stronger than they are." No, you sit down and see how you can internationalize it and use it to further get rid of whatever nuclear weapons might remain
The President. Well, they're already doing research and, as I say, probably have gone further than we have in particle-beam weapons, lasers and that sort of thing, and have been very active at it. 
Isn't there the possibility that—I don't know, I'm not a scientist—but what if they would use that research then, instead, to find out how to make offensive weapons impervious, that could defeat your defensive weapon? 
They are the force that has revealed itself as expansionist; we haven't shown any tendency to be that way. We know, Americans know, that however they may fear us over there, they may think that we're the other—you know that we don't have any aggressive intentions of suddenly going after them with a weapon of this kind. But on the other hand, we have to look at their whole expansionist policy and say they constitute the threat. 
As a matter of fact, their own words-there hasn't been a Russian leader yet who has not at some time or other confirmed that he is committed, as they have always been, to the world revolution—the idea of the one world Communist state. Now, can they blame us for sitting here saying we have to protect ourselves against you?
The President. No, because I've never thought of that from the standpoint of destroying them and leaving them in rubble. No, I have thought of it that the desire and the soul of man—more than any other, as long as man has lived on this Earth—has been for freedom. And I just can't believe that a system such as theirs can continue to hold its people and to hold other peoples in subjugation, and that someday, the people are going to say, hey, there's a better way to do things. 
This is my reference to—that their system has been tried and failed. And the other things of calling them evil empire and everything, that wasn't just done for words, the sake of words. I felt, after all of the years of pursuing detente, and detente was usually a one-way street, it never really became a two-way street; unilateral disarmament-hoping they would follow suit and they didn't, they just grew stronger. I thought it was necessary to let them know we were looking at them realistically; that we didn't have any illusions about that they would suddenly take off the wolf's clothing and put on sheepskins. Then—and I think that it maybe has played a part in their willingness to come now and negotiate—they know—for once, maybe for the first time—they know that we're not going to sit here and let them go on piling up a massive advantage over us. 
The President. Well, no, because, as I said, I've never thought of using this weapon offensively, in an offense against them. If their goal is really what they've said it was, we'll meet their goal of the elimination of the nuclear weapons. 
The President. Well, as I say, there's the potential of them not having to create it. What if the weapon is such and so complete that you'd say, look—because you remember this—we all know how to make nuclear missiles. Now, if you eliminate them by treaty, you always have to wonder is someone sequestering a few away, or since we know how to meet them, could there come a day down the road, possible confrontation, some time of strain, when somebody says, "Hey, let's turn out a few of these?" 
The President. Oh, I think they're trying to match it, and, as I say, I think they started ahead of us on that, which would be all the more reason, then, why we should have it. If we're right in our suspicions that they are expansionist and—they already outnumber us greatly in the offensive weapons, and then they alone developed a defensive weapon before us, then they wouldn't have to worry about our deterrent—a retaliatory strike. Then they could issue the ultimatum to the world. 
So, if there's any thought of that, then it would make it all the more necessary that we have a defensive weapon, too. 
The President. It's hard to be optimistic when you look back at the record. There have been some 19 offers and efforts by ourselves since World War II to seek control of this, including at one time to totally internationalize it and give it to everybody, put it in the hands of an international group. 
The open skies proposal of Eisenhower to open both countries up to complete inspection-and all of these things and always the Soviet Union has resisted, even when they didn't have it and when we had the monopoly. But they evidently had seen what it could mean to them, so they were going forward. 
So, it's hard to be optimistic. On the other hand, there are a couple of things that lead me to believe there's a possibility. Number one are their own words about voicing—before they even get to the table—this desire to rid ourselves. One of them said to me, just between the two of us, he said, "Can we go on forever sitting on these ever-rising mountains of weapons?" And I said, "No, why don't we start reducing the mountains?" And if we do it evenly and are still sitting on them when we get down here, the mountains aren't so big and we still are safe from each other. 
So, what leads me to believe there's hope is not the idea, as I said before, that too often in the past when we've said, well, if they understand how nice we are, maybe they'll be nice, too. No, you'll get an agreement when it is to their practical interest also. All right, we have announced our determination to not let them have the monopoly of power that they've been building. 
They know they cannot match us industrially. They sat there in World War II taking the horrible losses that they took before victory, and they saw us—two oceans and two sides of the world—fighting a war. And we even had the one line that—contrary to things they've said since—when Stalin after the war said that without our industrial might, without our help, victory could not have been theirs. 
Well, they've never admitted anything like that since. But I think now that that could be the way in which they can say, look, if we're faced with an ongoing arms race with the United States—and they're already pretty much up to full capacity with how far down their people's subsistence level is and all—that they could now see the practical value in saying, well, there is another way—if we start reducing them instead of increasing them. 
And this leads me to believe that possibly they can see the practicality of this and do it. This brings to mind—there's another cartoon about this one, and that was some time ago, when the cartoon appeared of the two Russian generals, and the one of them was saying to the other, "I liked the arms race better when we were the only ones in it." [Laughter] 


Remarks to Private Sector Leaders During a White House Briefing on the MX Missile 
March 6, 1985

I was elected in 1980 and reelected a few months ago, pledging to put our economy back on track and to rebuild our defenses. Modernizing our strategic forces was vital. We unilaterally refrained from deploying many new strategic systems in the 1970's-unilaterally refrained, even as the Soviets rushed forward to expand and upgrade their nuclear capability, testing and deploying at least three new intercontinental ballistic missile systems and stationing them in the hardened silos. More than 800 new missiles with some 5,000 warheads were added to their arsenal

Of course, there are those who will continue to search for any reason to vote "No." If the decisions were determined that way, our military could have no weapons at all; and this would be fine, except that the Soviets would not be suffering from the same handicap. Our goal is to negotiate with the Soviets, to reach agreements which will permit us to reduce the number of weapons threatening mankind, both nuclear and conventional. 
And as you are aware, next week we will begin negotiations in Geneva. The vote on the Peacekeeper is also a vote on Geneva, and the Soviets are watching this with intense interest. So, let no one misjudge what is at stake. 
Rejecting the Peacekeeper will knock the legs out from under the negotiating table, leaving the Soviets no conclusion but that America lacks unity and resolve. I can think of no greater disaster for the negotiating position of the United States; weakness does not make for good negotiations. 
This isn't a new revelation. President Teddy Roosevelt said it a long time ago: "We need to keep in a condition of preparedness," he said, "not because we want war, but because we desire to stand with those whose plea for peace is listened to with respectful attention." The success we've had in getting the Soviets to the negotiating table or getting their "respectful attention," as Teddy would say, can be traced not to vacillation, but to firmness and sense of purpose. 
We pledged that if the Soviets would not work with us to reduce the number of their intermediate-range missiles aimed at Europe, we would deploy our cruise and Pershings to balance the threat. Our courage and that of our allies let the Kremlin know that we will not compromise our security and that we have the political will to stick with it. We mean no threat to them, but we'll notpermit them to pose a threat to us. 
There should be no mistake—a rejection of the Peacekeeper will diminish our chance of reaching a fair and equitable arms reduction agreement now or in the future. Without the Peacekeeper, the Soviets will have little incentive to discontinue their buildup or to reach agreements with us. 
Years ago I was a negotiator for my union. When we picked a team and sent them to the bargaining table, we stood behind them; unity was the key to success-then we were seeking higher wages and better working conditions. The team we're sending to Geneva will be seeking peace and security for our country and the free world. It's the American team, and I need your help in backing them up. 
I hope that we can count on you to get the message out that now is not the time to cancel a major weapons system or undercut our allies or to reward Soviet belligerence. Now is the time for American courage, unity, and resolve—time to stand together behind our team in Geneva so they can represent us with all the vigor and confidence that they can muster. 
The Soviets respect this kind of resolve. Andrei Sakharov, a courageous voice for peace in the Soviet Union, understands this. He won the Nobel Peace Prize, and he holds the respect of the world for his struggle for peace and human rights. Well, he wrote to a friend in the West that arms control talks with the Soviets would be easier if the U.S. were to have the MX. He knew the risk of sending a message like that


Remarks at a White House Meeting With Members of the National Newspaper Association 
March 7, 1985

But before I—and, incidentally, also, our negotiators will leave this weekend for Geneva. And I can't tell you that passing the MX will guarantee a good arms reduction treaty with the Soviet Union; but I can guarantee you that a vote against it and not passing it will make that kind of a treaty much more difficult, if not impossible. The fellows on the other side of the table aren't there out of good will; they're there for the reason that Margaret Thatcher said to our Congress just a few days ago: They're there because of our strength; that's why they've come back to the table. And they see a determination on our side to maintain that strength


Remarks to the United States Negotiating Team for the Nuclear and Space Arms Negotiations With the Soviet Union 
March 8, 1985

Soviet leader Konstantin Chernenko said last month: "Our ultimate objective here is the complete elimination of nuclear weapons everywhere on this planet, the complete removal of the threat of nuclear war." Well, I welcome that statement and assure Mr. Chernenko that the elimination of nuclear weapons is also the ultimate objective of the American government and the American people. 
It's now our task and responsibility to take practical steps to turn this vision into reality. We should have no illusions that this will be easy, since any venture of this magnitude will take time. And since the most vital security interests of both sides are at stake, this will clearly be long and difficult. We're realistic because we know that our differences with the Soviet Union are great. Patience, strength, and unity—Western unity—will, therefore, be required if we're to have a successful outcome. 
Next week the United States and the Soviet Union meet in Geneva to begin a new dialog on these issues. And above all, we seek agreement as soon as possible on real and verifiable reductions in American and Soviet offensive nuclear arms. For our part, the United States is ready with firmness, patience, and understanding to negotiate fair and equitable agreements reducing the dangers of nuclear war and enhancing strategic stability. 
Like Americans everywhere, I want these negotiations to succeed and will do everything I can to ensure that this happens. And I pray that the Soviet leadership is prepared to make the same commitment

Radio Address to the Nation on the MX Missile 
March 9, 1985

I'd like to talk to you today about the deep desire we all share to keep America free, secure, and at peace. In 3 days' time, American and Soviet negotiators will meet in Geneva to explore ways to reduce nuclear arsenals and lower the risks of war. 
No issue concerns me more and none has taken up more of my time than our quest for a breakthrough on arms reductions. I do so willingly because as your President and as a husband, a father, and a grandfather, I know what's at stake for everyone. And I'm pleased that the Soviets, after staying away for more than a year, have agreed to return to the bargaining table. The renewal of these negotiations is an important step in theright direction, and America will be ready to move forward on all promising avenues for progress. 
As I speak to you, our team is in Geneva. I cannot think of a more welcome message to give them than a strong vote of confidence from you the people and the Congress. I know that all Americans stand foursquare behind our negotiating team and wish them every success. In fact, you're the reason that the Soviet Union returned to the negotiating table. The Soviet leadership has seen your patience and your determination to keep America strong. They've seen the renewal of your spirit and the rebuilding of a robust and expanding American economy. They know we're going to continue moving forward to protect our freedom and our way of life. 
The MX Peacekeeper missile has been part of the consensus and with good reason: Time and again, America exercised unilateral restraint, good will, and a sincere commitment to arms reductions. As a result, many of the missiles protecting our security at this very moment are older than the Air Force men and women taking care of them. They're missiles of the sixties, originally equipped with 1950's aerotechnology. It's sort of like a 1963 jalopy with some new parts. You know as well as I do that in many States automobiles that old will soon qualify as antiques, but the Soviets don't deal in antiques. Their response was the same as it's always been: no restraint, just build, build, and build. While we debated and delayed, they developed three new types of land-based intercontinental missiles, and they've added to their arsenal 800 new missiles with more than 5,000 nuclear warheads. 
It took us too long to realize there is no easy, cheap way to buy security. In 1983, based on the recommendations of a distinguished blue-ribbon panel, the Scowcroft commission, the Congress joined with us to approve the MX Peacekeeper program-100 up-to-date missiles that will replace aging Minuteman missiles. Since that time, the MX Peacekeeper has finished seven successful flight tests, and the Soviets are back at the bargaining table. 
Well, once again, the moment of truth is at hand. As I mentioned a few minutes ago, each House of Congress will soon vote on whether to release the MX funds they approved last year and continue production of the missile. The Soviet leadership views the current debate on the MX as a key test of American resolve. 
If the Congress acts responsibly, our negotiators will have a chance to succeed, but if we don't have the courage to modernize our land-based strategic missile systems, the Soviets will have little reason to negotiate meaningful reductions. And why should they? We would be signaling to them that they can gain more through propaganda and stonewalling than through serious negotiations. The time is now to send a signal loud and clear that a united and resolute America backs our negotiators at Geneva, and that could be the real key to a successful outcome. 


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters 
March 11, 1985

Today we've learned of the death of the head of state, Konstantin Chernenko, and I've sent my condolences to the Soviet leadership and people. I want them to know that we will deal with Chairman Chernenko's successor with an open mind and will continue our efforts to improve relations between our two nations—to settle our differences fairly and, particularly, to lower the levels of nuclear arms. 
Tomorrow in Geneva, American negotiators will sit down with their Soviet counterparts to begin the most important arms talks in which our nation is likely to participate for the rest of this decade. I'm pleased that negotiations will begin as scheduled. Weeks of painstaking preparation have now been completed, and although in the interest of confidentiality I can't go into the details of our negotiating positions, let me assure you of this: Our team stands ready to put forward concrete and constructive proposals. And they will in turn respond to good-faith Soviet proposals with flexibility and an active interest. We earnestly hope that the Soviets are equally prepared for serious give-and-take. 
Our short-term goal at Geneva will be to reduce American and Soviet offensive nuclear forces, systems which are already in place, whose use would prove a calamity to tens of millions of people. 
Our goal for the medium term, if research goes as we expect, is to discuss how the United States and the Soviet Union can move away from sole reliance on the threat of nuclear retaliation toward greater reliance on defenses which threaten no one. 
Our long-term goal: the complete elimination of nuclear arms. 
As our negotiators begin their work in Geneva, we at home must remain firm in ourresolve to maintain an adequate deterrent to war. Our negotiating flexibility must be coupled with firmness and resolve if it is to be effective in producing the outcome we all desire: radical reductions in nuclear weapons, as a step toward the ultimate goal of eliminating them. 
We're realistic about the differences between ourselves and the Soviets. As we pursue arms control, we will at the same time press forward on a worldwide respect for the dignity of man. 
In Geneva we face a long and difficult road. To travel it, we'll need strength, patience, and allied unity. The effort will be great, and the final destination, which will so heavily depend on the Soviet intentions, is uncertain. But the road before us is the road of peace, and on that we dare not hesitate or falter. 
So, I'd just like to close by saying: Let us travel it together, Americans united as never before. We have sent a congressional delegation, Members of the Senate and the House over there of both parties, for the sole purpose of impressing on the Soviet Union that when it comes to the water's edge—we aren't Democrats or Republicans, we're Americans.
So, thank you, God bless you, and— 
The President. I think it's very hard to predict anything of the kind when you realize that the Soviet policy is really determined by a dozen or so individuals in the Politburo. They are the ones who chose him. It is a collective government. And while an individual once chosen by them can, undoubtedly, influence or persuade them to certain things that might be particular theories or policies of his, the government basically remains the same group of individuals. 
The President. Well, I think all of us dream of a Cuba that will one day recognize that it should be once again a member of the American states in the Western Hemisphere and not a satellite of the Soviet Union. 
The President. Very much so, and I was with the previous three also. [Laughter] I was ready to have a meeting—and as they themselves said, at such a time as you could have a legitimate agenda and not just have a meeting to get acquainted. 
But I'm looking forward to this, and—I can give you one figure that would kind of spell out what my problem has been, because there have been some who've wanted to criticize me in contrast with previous Presidents. 
In 48 years, of 8 Presidencies prior to mine, there were only 3 leaders over that span of 48 years and 8 Presidents of the Soviet Union. Well, we're coming up the fourth in mine, and I've just started my fifth year, and there were 3 of them in a little over 3 years. 
So, you know, you have to wait for a new man now to get in place and establish his regime, and then I'll be more than ready because I think there's a great mutual suspicion between the two countries; I think that ours is more justified than theirs. And I—at my own table here I spoke of—reminded of the fact that when World War II ended and we had the monopoly of the nuclear weapon and our industry was intact and had never been bombed into rubble as it had in most of Europe, if we really were the aggressor the Soviets accused us of being, we could have taken anything in the world then, and no one could have stopped us. And we didn't do it, instead we went abroad with the Marshall plan to help everyone, including our erstwhile enemies. 


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session During a White House Briefing for Members of the Magazine Publishers Association 
March 14, 1985

The Soviets will be following the vote on the MX with keen interest. And the signal to them will be unmistakable. America will be seen as united and ready to negotiate if the MX moves forward or returning again to vacillation and weakness if the MX fails

The President. Well, I don't think there's any evidence that he is less dominated by their system and their philosophy than any of the others. But it isn't true that I don't trust anyone under 70. [Laughter] 
I think he has spoken out there to his own people about improvements in the economy there, particularly is he noted for advocating, you might say, more private venture in the agricultural section than the present system of government farms. And I look forward to dealing with him. 
I think what is most evident, and I believe that this will be reflected in him, is that the Soviet Union is in a different frame of mind than they've been in the past: That they are back at the negotiating table on arms reductions because they recognize a hard, cold fact, and that is that the United States isn't going to unilaterally disarm in the face of their military buildup. 
And now that they know that they have to compete with us with regard to security needs, I think they've got a healthy respect for our technology and our industrial capacity and that they, I believe, are really going to try and, with us, negotiate a reduction of armaments. 
That has never been done before. There have been agreements like the SALT agreements that only limited how fast you could increase. But this is the first time that they, themselves, have said they would like to see the elimination of nuclear weapons.


Toast at a Luncheon With Provincial and Community Leaders in Quebec City, Canada 
March 18, 1985

Upgrading NATO's conventional forces is essential to deterrence. The greater our ability to resist Soviet aggression with conventional forces, the less likely such aggression will ever occur. NATO is engaged in a rebuilding program, and today I want to thank publicly Prime Minister Mulroney and the Canadian people for yourcommitment to enhance your contribution to NATO's conventional forces and our overall defenses. 
You know, it puzzles me to hear the Soviets describe research to protect humanity as a threat to peace. Their protests ring a little hollow. I did some research of my own and found that in 1967 former Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin said, "The antimissile system is not a weapon of aggression or attack, it is a defensive system." And the Soviets took his words to heart and began investing heavily in strategic defense. 
As much as we may hope for greater stability through arms control, we must remember that the Soviet record of compliance with past agreements has been poor. The Soviet Union signed the Yalta accord, pledging free elections, then proceeded to dominate Eastern Europe. They signed the Geneva Convention, banning use of chemical weapons; SALT II, limiting development of new weapons; and the ABM treaty—but are now violating all three. And they signed the Helsinki accord, solemnly pledging respect for human rights, but then jailed the individuals trying to monitor it in the U.S.S.R. 
Arms control is not the only issue on the East-West agenda, and the opening of the Geneva talks is not the only development in East-West relations. In most of our Western countries, our peoples can look forward to continued strong, stable governments, and our alliances are in good shape. We have demonstrated unity and firmness in our dealings with the East. We're ready to work with the Soviet Union for more constructive relations. We all want to hope that last week's change of leadership in Moscow will open up new possibilities for doing this. 
There's plenty to talk about—in arms control, on regional issues, on human rights, and in our bilateral relations. My representatives in Moscow had good talks with Mr. Gorbachev, and Prime Minister Mulroney has given me his own assessment of the new Soviet leadership. If the Soviets are as ready as we are to take the other side's concerns into account, it should be possible to resolve problems and reduce international tensions. 
We cannot look the other way when treaties are violated, human beings persecuted, religions banned, and entire democracies crushed. We cannot ignore that while Canadians and Americans have donated nearly $100 million from their own pockets to help feed starving Ethiopians, the Soviets and all their satellites have given almost no aid. But they continue to provide more than a half a billion dollars a year in military supplies that the Ethiopian Government is using against its own people.


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Raul Alfonsin of Argentina 
March 19, 1985

Well, today is an exciting time to be an American—and I mean all of us. From the North Slope of Alaska to the tip of Tierra del Fuego, more people here are living in democracy than ever before. Ninety percent of this hemisphere's population lives in democracies or in countries in transition to democracy. This trend, however, is threatened by Marxist-Leninists who continue, with the heavy support of the Soviet Union and Cuba, to undermine freely elected governments and democratic movements


Remarks at a Senate Republican Policy Committee Luncheon 
March 19, 1985

In 1981, as you know, I announced our strategic modernization program. This program was designed to redress the strategic imbalance that had been created during the 1970's, when our defense efforts went slack while the Soviets conducted the biggest military buildup in the history of mankind. 
While we debated, the Soviets deployed. Indeed, the number of MX-caliber missiles they have already in place is now higher than 600. Deployment of the Peacekeeper at this point, I believe, represents a simple necessity. 
There's another point I must add here. Some of your colleagues have come up with the idea of simply putting a hold or a limit on MX production. Well, I strongly oppose those ideas, as the Soviets will see them for just what they are—a collapse of American resolve. 
On the Peacekeeper you have a clear choice. A no vote will gravely weaken our national defenses, waste the billions already spent on the Peacekeeper program, undercut our allies who have already stood firm in accepting new Pershing and cruise missiles, cripple the position of our negotiators in Geneva, and show the Soviets that, despite the progress our country has made, at a moment of historical importance, a majority in the Congress of the United States still lacks resolve. In the wake of world peace, that must not happen. 
If you vote yes, you'll show the Soviets that America today is united and resolute and, thereby, advance the cause of the peace for us and our children. With all my heart, I ask for your support.


The President's News Conference
March 21, 1985
Let me commend again the Senate of the United States for having approved production of 21 more MX/Peacekeeper missiles. The Senate has endorsed the decision of four Presidents that the Peacekeeper is a vital component of the American deterrent. Now is the testing time for the House of Representatives. The votes there will answer the question of whether we stand united at Geneva or whether America will face the Soviet Union as a nation divided over the most fundamental questions of her national security. 
For more than a decade we've debated the MX, and while we were debating, the Soviets were deploying more than 600 such missiles and targeting them upon the United States. Now they're on the verge of deploying two new strategic land-based systems, and we're still debating. 
No request by an American President for a major strategic system deemed vital to the national security has ever been denied by an American Congress. It is that tradition of bipartisan unity on national defense that brought the Soviets back to Geneva. And unless that tradition is maintained next week in the House, there's little prospect of success at Geneva. 
The President. Well, I don't really consider it being rebuffed, Helen, because the man has only been in office for a few days, and I have some idea of what is confronting him now. But I've felt the same way about each of the three previous leaders there and then things intervened that made it impossible—that there are a number of things—bilateral situations between our two countries, other things to talk about that we're negotiating or talking to each other on a ministerial level, and that some of those could probably be further advanced if we met at a summit. 
And so, what I always meant by an agenda, a planned meeting—not just one to get acquainted—is one in which—just as when we go in a meeting, even to Canada, we have announced things that we want to talk about, and they have an agenda of things they want to talk about—mutual problems that confront us—and I think it's high time that we did this. 
The President. Well, I have to think that they should be good. I think in some of our people, we've had about an hour and a half conversation—the Vice President, the Secretary of State did with him when they were there. And, so, I think there is a good chance of that. 
The reason that I issued the invitation was because under the kind of protocol that exists—and you look back over the history of such meetings—why, it's our turn to be the host. So, that's why I proposed it, that if he would, the invitation was extended for whenever he found it convenient.
Where's your red tie? [Laughter


The President. Well, I can assure you we're not going to do anything that's going to undercut the negotiations that are going on. We're hopeful that, for the first time, we really have an opportunity to get a reduction of missiles. I have said repeatedly-and continue it, and I really mean it—we're going to wait and deal with that problem when we come to that point—and it has to do with some of our submarine missiles—as to what our conduct's going to be.
Sam? 
The President. No, that's right, we don't know. But on the other hand, our record as compared to theirs with regard to observing all the niceties of all the treaties is so much superior that I don't think we're in a position to cause any great trouble.

Radio Address to the Nation on the Federal Budget and Tax Reform 
March 23, 1985

Our bipartisan effort to rebuild America's defenses only began 3 years ago after more than a decade of neglect, while the Soviets surged ahead with the greatest military buildup in history, adding countries to their empire with the case of a thief plucking apples off a tree

For my part, I made clear that in further reduction in defense, vital weapons systems—either conventional or strategic-must not be touched, period. The deficit can and will be brought down, but not by raising taxes, which would just torpedo growth and make the deficit worse, or by gambling with America's security when the Soviet Union is every bit as aggressive, expansionist, and dangerous as before


Remarks at a White House Briefing for Central American Leaders 
March 25, 1985

But the Soviet Union has its own plan for Central America, a region which Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko described as "boiling like a cauldron." In the last 5 years, the Soviets have provided more military assistance to Cuba and Nicaragua alone than the United States has provided to all of Latin America. The Soviets' plan is designed to crush self-determination of free people, to crush democracy in Costa Rica, Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Panama. It's a plan to turn Central America into a Soviet beachhead of aggression that could spread terror and instability north and south, disrupt our vital sealanes, cripple our ability to carry out ourcommitments to our European allies, and send tens of millions of refugees streaming in a human tidal wave across all our borders. 
Already the Nicaraguan people are fleeing the Sandinista tyranny, escaping into your neighboring countries. In just the last few weeks, thousands of Nicaraguans have fled to Costa Rica. They tell of rising resistance to the Sandinista dictatorship, a dictatorship that speaks reassuring words of peace to the outside world, even as it has moved to crush personal freedoms, attack the church, nearly wipe out an entire culture-the Miskito Indians—summarily execute suspected dissidents, drive leading democrats into exile, and force young boys to defend the revolution while Soviet-bloc advisers sit in Managua living off the people
Well, the Sandinistas became, as they had always planned, eager puppets for the Soviets and the Cubans. They created their own Karl Marx postage stamps. They sang an anthem that called the United States the enemy of all mankind. They brought in East Germans to organize their state security. They became a rubber stamp for the Communist bloc in the U.N., voting against the democracies on virtually every crucial issue, from refusing to condemn Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia to notaccepting Israel's credentials. 
While the United States was offering friendship and providing unprecedented sums of aid, the Sandinistas were building up an army that dwarfed and bullied their neighbors. While Americans were debating the Sandinistas true intentions, Tomas Borge, the Sandinista Minister of the Interior, who received his training from the Soviets, Cubans, and PLO, was saying, "You cannot be a true revolutionary in Latin America without being Marxist-Leninist." Well, while we were bending over backward to be friendly and helpful, the Sandinistas were already conspiring to bring Communist revolution to all of Central America. 
As far back as 1969, they pledged to "struggle for a true union of the Central American peoples within one country, beginning with support for national liberation movements in neighboring states." Once in power in Nicaragua, they began working for their revolution, without frontiers, in which small, democratic, unarmed Costa Rica would be—and I quote their words-"the dessert." Well, today the PLO is honored with an Embassy in Managua. And, in addition to their close ties with the Soviets, Cubans, and East Germans, the Sandinistas receive support from Bulgaria, Vietnam, and North Korea. The radical states of Iran and Libya also have established military ties with the Sandinistas in a "new" Nicaragua, which also harbors members of the Red Brigades, the ETA, and other terrorist organizations.


Exchange With Reporters on the Death of Major Arthur D. Nicholson, Jr., in the German Democratic Republic 
March 25, 1985

The President. This is a tragedy that never should have happened, and we challenge that. But we have already registered our protest for the tragic death of this man. 
The President. No. What's done there is done in my name. 
The President. No. I know that we can't go on with this other subject, and I don't want to take it up here. We've got another subject in our minds. But I think if you'll check, you'll find that each country, the Soviets and the United States, are permitted under the terms of the Four Power Agreement-we each have 14 military personnel. We have them in East Germany; they have them in West Germany. And what they can do and the areas that they can go into are all delineated, and he was doing nothing except what we're entitled to do under the agreements. 
The President. I'm still waiting for a lot of details on this, but that is permitted in both areas. 
The President. A lack of outrage? No, you can't print what I'm thinking. [Laughter] 
The President. No, it would make me more anxious to go to one.


Remarks to Members of Congress During a White House Briefing on the MX Missile and the Soviet-United States Nuclear and Space Arms Negotiations 
March 25, 1985

The President. Thank you very much. Let me just take a moment and say first why I want you to know why I feel that support for the Peacekeeper is so very important, not only for our national security but for the solidity of our NATO alliance and for our successful arms reductions talks in Geneva as well. Afterward, Ambassador Max Kampelman, who's flown in from Geneva, will discuss arms control with you and take your questions. Max has been meeting with Mr. Karpov, his Soviet counterpart, for almost 2 weeks now—too short a time, of course, to expect any dramatic breakthrough. 
But I think we've already gotten a flavor of what those talks are going to be like. We have some tough negotiating ahead, but we expected that. The Soviets aren't going to compromise out of the goodness of their hearts, but only if they calculate that an agreement is in their immediate self-interest. We'd be doing the American people a disservice if we imagined otherwise. 
We do, of course, have much common ground on which to negotiate. But if history is any guide, we can be sure that the Soviets are not going to simply give up their tremendous advantage in the MX-type missiles without some incentive, and without the MX that incentive is lacking. 
For years, when the Soviets were planning an ABM system and we weren't, you'll remember we were trying to get negotiations on that. Only when you in the Congress appropriated funds for our own ABM system, the Soviets suddenly decided they wanted to talk seriously; and soon we had an ABM treaty. After staying away for more than a year now, they have returned to the bargaining table. 
But let's not delude ourselves. The Soviets returned to the table only because they've recognized the failure of their efforts to divide us from our allies and weaken our determination to rebuild our national defense. Now, if we don't want to see our hopes evaporate, we must continue to demonstrate the resolve to carry the negotiations to a successful conclusion on a sound basis. 
Just last month, former Defense Secretary Harold Brown said, "We have to proceed with the modernization program of offensive forces, including the MX." But while we've been debating, the Soviets have been deploying—over 600 MX-class missiles in the last decade. As our land-based deterrence slips slowly but surely toward obsolescence, the Soviets are upgrading, modernizing their systems every day. And they're busy developing two new mobile ICBM systems in addition to the 600 MX-class missiles. Our own mobile system, the Midgetman, is still on the drawing board and at least 7 years from deployment. 
The Soviets have seen our restraint only as an opportunity to gain the advantage. The modernization of our land-based deterrent must no longer be delayed in the vain hope that they will simply follow suit. For us to back down now on Peacekeeper deployment will deliver a telling blow to our allies' confidence in us. They stood firm in the deployment of Pershing II and cruise missiles in Europe. We asked them to walk through fire and brave a storm of Soviet propaganda and not-so-veiled threats, and they did. 
And I believe that not only the Soviets but our European allies view the current debate in the Peacekeeper as a key test of ourresolve. If we fail, we'll be signaling to the world that on this key issue we are irresolute and divided. And the Soviet Union will see that, in dealing with the United States, propaganda and stonewalling are much more profitable than good-faith negotiations. And our allies may wonder how much confidence they can place in an alliance whose largest member cannot even show the determination and fortitude of its smallest. 
Tomorrow's vote in the House could very well spell the difference between success or defeat in our arms reduction efforts. It's important that together we send a message-loud and clear—that a united and resolute America backs our negotiators in their efforts to reverse the arms race and bring us closer to a stable, secure, and lasting peace, without fear for us and our children. 

Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Central America 
March 30, 1985

A key Soviet objective has long been to turn Central America into a beachhead for subversion. By tying us down in this hemisphere, by penetrating our vital sealanes and crippling our ability to meet ourcommitments worldwide, the Soviets will find it much easier to intimidate other nations and to expand their empire. 
I know many well-intentioned people would rather notaccept these facts. But we who have the responsibility for governing cannot afford to be ostriches with our heads in the sand. 
Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko described the region on our doorstep as "boiling like a cauldron" and urged revolution. We know that the Soviets turned Grenada into a warehouse of violence. They did this in the last 5 years, and they provided more military assistance to Cuba and Nicaragua than we did to all of Latin America. And we know that the support Nicaragua gets from Cuba, Bulgaria, East Germany, North Korea, Libya, the PLO, and Iran is a threat to our security, because the dictators of Cuba and Nicaragua have not only pledged to spread communism, they've been caught—forgive me—red-handed trying to do just that. 
U.S. support for the freedom fighters is morally right and intimately linked to our own security. If we refuse to help their just cause, if we pull the plug and allow the freedom fighters to be wiped out by the same helicopter gunships the Soviets are using to murder thousands of Afghans, then our ultimate price to protect peace, freedom, and our way of life will be dear indeed


Interview With Lou Cannon, Dave Hoffman, and Lynn Downie of the Washington Post 
April 1, 1985

The President. Well, nothing that I can talk about here. But let me just say, I know this about what the polls show, and I know what happens up on the Hill. But we've been subjected in this country to a very sophisticated lobbying campaign by a totalitarian government, the Sandinistas. There has been a disinformation program that is virtually worldwide, and we know that both the Soviets and the Cubans have such a disinformation network that is beyond anything that we can match. And, of course, I don't think the people have heard the thing that we're tying to explain of what is going on. 
The President. Lou, let me just say—and this, I know, will be kind of frustrating-I've had a response to my letter, but I never talk about content of communications between myself and other heads of state. 
The President. Well, again, as I say, that would be commenting, and that would be opening a door to all kinds of speculation. I wrote, and he answered, and we're in negotiations. And we'll just leave it at that. 
The President. Well, I'm going to continue—I made it evident, or made it plain, that I would have liked such a thing with his predecessors. But I'm going to continue 
The President. hopeful that we can have such a meeting. 
The President. No. There seems to be a little misunderstanding on the part of some columnists about my answer the other day to that, that it made me even more anxious for a summit meeting. Some have made it seem as if I was being an appeaser or something—not at all. This was a murder, a coldblooded murder; and it reflects on the difference between two societies—one that has no regard for human life and one, like our own, that thinks it's the most important thing. 
And, yes, I want a meeting even more so—to sit down and look someone in the eye and talk to him about what we can do to make sure nothing of this kind happens again. 
The President. Well, I don't think there's any hold on the talks over there. They're in three groups: One group is talking about space and defense weapons; one is talking about strategic weapons; and the third one is talking about the intermediate-range weapons in Europe. And the negotiations are going forward. 
The Strategic Defense Initiative is purely research. And Mr. Gromyko himself said there's no way to control that, that it's not covered by any treaty. And the plain truth of the matter is, they've been doing the same kind of research in the same areas and started it before we did. 
Now, I do mean that if this research could lead to the kind of a weapon that would make one have to think twice as to whether they could be successful with the use of nuclear weapons, then it would lead to the very thing that both the late Mr. Chernenko and Gromyko have said, and that is that they would like to see the elimination of nuclear weapons; so would we. And if a defensive weapon that could be successful against them helps bring that about by making them too costly to take the chance of putting those costly things in the air only to be shot down, then we'd be further on the way toward the elimination of nuclear weapons. And we'd all be better off. 
The President. Oh, yes. I've never believed that even though they said this, because my own response to Mr. Gromyko, when he indicated that same thing to me-my own response was: "Look, we can settle it right here. We're ready to go all the way on the elimination of nuclear weapons." But I didn't get an answer. 
But, yes, I would think that the logical thing would be to start with the reduction of the numbers of weapons, to get them down to a lower level. My hope has been that once we start on that path, that gradually everyone would see that it makes more sense to keep on going until you've eliminated them. 
The President. Oh, I haven't really thought about whether that makes any difference or not. It's just that the world is living under a threat; and other people are going to try, as we know, to get missiles themselves. And some of them are less responsible than others, and they're not all superpowers. And I just think that it's a threat that humankind should not have to live under.
So, again, as I say, if we can find additional ways—and we have already reduced the original budget considerably—if we can find additional ways in which there could be some postponements of something or other—not weapons systems—there are a number of fairly civilian-type activities that take place in the military, also. If some of those would not, in any way, reduce our defensive capability and yet would provide some savings to help us as we try to get a handle on this budget—all right, that's one way to look. But I don't see where there could be any compromise on weapons systems that have been chosen, because we believe they're necessary to redress the imbalance between ourselves and the Soviet Union. 
I've heard some spokesmen, and some who should know better, in and out of government, some of the shows on television, and sometimes in the newsprint, voicing their opinions that somehow we're on a parity—they've even used that term—with the Soviet Union. This is the most ridiculous thing I've ever heard. The Soviet Union virtually outnumbers us in any type of weapon you want to name, has consistently modernized their land-based nuclear missiles, where we're just trying to with the traumatic experience of the 21 these last few days—which is the first modernization of our land-based missiles in almost the lifetime of the men and women who are handling these weapons. They are about 3 to 1 in megatonnage, nuclear megatonnage, over us. They outnumber us in conventional weapons in almost every category. Their navy has several hundred more ships than we have




Remarks Announcing a Central American Peace Proposal and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters 
April 4, 1985

want to emphasize that consistent with the 21 goals of the Contadoran process, the United States continues to seek: One, Nicaragua's implementation of its commitment to democracy made to the Organization of American States; two, an end to Nicaragua's aggression against its neighbors; three, a removal of the thousands of Soviet bloc, Cuban, PLO, Libyan, and other military and security personnel; and four, a return of the Nicaraguan military to a level of parity with their neighbors. 
Democracy can succeed in Central America. But Congress must release the funds that can create incentives for dialog and peace. If we provide too little help, our choice will be a Communist Central America with Communist subversion spreading southward and northward. We face the risk that a hundred million people, from Panama to our open southern border, could come under the control of pro-Soviet regimes and threaten the United States with violence, economic chaos, and a human tidal wave of refugees


Remarks in an Interview With Nicholas Ashford and Charles Douglas-Home of the Times of London, Together With Written Responses to Questions 
April 4, 1985

The President. I don't know whether you could say that, because there have been summit meetings before. I would look on it as an opportunity to clear the air and express our desire to have a relationship that would eliminate this great threat that seems to hang over the world. If in any way it could help in the negotiations that are going on in Geneva—and very frankly, I'd like to speak to him to clear up some things, like the kind of tragedy with our officer there in Germany. 1 Those things are so senseless; there's no need for them. But I don't know that you could see it as a turning point. After all, he has been for 4 years a member of the Politburo, 14 years a member of the party council. So, we know that the government really is a collective-the Politburo has the ultimate authority. So, I can't see that, as some speculated, there would be a great change of direction. It would only come about if that was the desire of that same Politburo. 
The President. They could improve if we can show them that it would be to their material advantage as well as someone else's. I think about the Geneva talks that we're in right now. It's the first time in about 50 years and more than 20 arms talks with them between World War II and the present that they sit down faced with the possibility that either we join together in reducing arms or they engage us in an arms race, which they know they can't win

I want to emphasize that, consistent with the 21 goals of the Contadora process, the United States continues to seek Nicaragua's implementation of its commitment to democracy made to the OAS. We also seek an end to Nicaragua's aggression against its neighbors. We think they should remove the thousands of Soviet bloc, Cuban, PLO, Libyan, and other military and security personnel and return the Nicaraguan military to a level of parity with their neighbors.

Therefore, it is not at all surprising that the Soviets are now seeking, as they have in the past in regard to other issues, to incite and exploit differences within the West as a means of undercutting alliance efforts to strengthen our defense and deterrent forces. Their propaganda tools are familiar ones, involving misrepresentation, threats, and now a callfor a moratorium that would freeze the imbalance in Europe. 
Though their current propaganda campaign contains little that is new, I can't help but be struck by how disingenuous it is for the Soviet Union—which possesses the world's only operational ABM system, which has been energetically pursuing an extensive research program in the area of ballistic missile defense, and which has taken actions counter to the letter and spirit of the ARM treaty—now to express such public criticism of the idea that the United States might also engage in its own research into the feasibility of strategic defense
The President. We are prepared to negotiate constructively with the Soviet Union with the goal of radically reducing nuclear arms and, ultimately, eliminating nuclear weapons entirely. If the Soviets approach the negotiations in the same serious fashion, it should be possible to reach agreement in the relatively short term. At the same time, we recognize fully the differences between us and the Soviets. Historically, it has often taken considerable negotiation to work out arms control agreements



Remarks at a Fund-raising Dinner for the Nicaragua Refugee Fund 
April 15, 1985

But the new regime became not a democracy but a dictatorship. Communism was embraced, and Nicaragua moved into the Soviet orbit. The best of the revolution, members of the original revolutionary government who had fought for high ideals, left the country. In all, more than a quarter of a million souls fled Nicaragua, and they're fleeing still. Many of the refugees are the poorest of the poor—Indians and peasants and terrified mothers and children. All of them need our help. But even more, perhaps, they need the attention of the world. After nearly 6 years, attention must be paid. 
As you know, the Sandinista dictatorship has taken absolute control of the government and the armed forces. It is a Communist dictatorship. It has done what Communist dictatorships do: created a repressive state security and secret police organization assisted by Soviet, East German, and Cuban advisers; harassed, and in many cases expunged, the political opposition, and rendered the democratic freedoms of speech, press, and assembly punishable by officially sanctioned harassment and imprisonment or death


Remarks at a Conference on Religious Liberty 
April 16, 1985

In the Soviet Union the church was immediately attacked by the Communist revolution. But the Soviets, bowing to Western squeamishness about the denial of liberties, often characterize their actions as merely defensive. 
In 1945 Josef Stalin met with Harry Hopkins, who had been sent by Harry Truman to discuss various East-West problems. In the middle of a talk about politics, Stalin interjected the following: In 1917, he said, the Russian Communist Party had proclaimed theright of religious freedom as part of their political program. But, he said, the churches of Russia had declared the Soviet Government anathema and had called on church members to resist the call of the Red Army. Now, what could we do, said Stalin, but declare war on the church! He assured Hopkins, however, that World War II had ended the church-state antagonism and now freedom of religion could be granted to the church. But that, as you know, never happened. 
History has taught us that you can bulldoze a church, but you can't extinguish all that is good in every human heart. And so, in spite of the dangers involved, there are Christians and Jews and Muslims and others throughout the Communist world who continue to practice their faith. Some of them have been imprisoned for their courage. There's the late Valerie Marchenko who died in a Soviet prison hospital a few short months ago. He was 37 years old, a scholar, and a Christian who, at his most recent trial, spoke of his belief in God and his faith in human goodness. There's Father Gleb Yakunin, who was recently sent to Siberia for 5 years of internal exile. He's another prisoner of faith. And Bronislav Borovsky, recently sentenced for smuggling Bibles into Czechoslovakia. These are only a few of many. 
We in the United States have protested this terrible abuse of people who are nothing less than heroes of this century. Most recently when congressional leaders met in Moscow with General Secretary Gorbachev, they gave the Soviet leadership a list of Baltic and Ukrainian prisoners of conscience. And the Council on Soviet Jewry and other groups were magnificent in making sure that the congressional delegation did not leave without extensive data on repression against Jews in the Soviet Union. 
Religious persecution, of course, is not confined to Europe. We see it in Iran, whose leaders have virtually declared war on the Bahais; we see it in Afghanistan, where the Soviet military has resorted to increasingly cruel measures against the Moslem people; and we see a variation on how to abuse religious freedom in the Sandinista regime of Nicaragua


Remarks at a White House Meeting with the Deficit Reduction Coalition 
April 16, 1985

The Soviet-bloc and terrorist nations flood Nicaragua with arms and personnel, sparing no expense in support of the totalitarian Sandinista regime, while the U.S. Congress remains paralyzed over a mere $14 million in humanitarian aid, less than the cost of the deadly Hind helicopters the Soviets have given the Communists to use against the resistance, the freedom fighters


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters 
April 18, 1985

This pattern, as I say, we've seen before. Bigger jails are being built, and they're called relocation camps. Refugees are pouring out of the country. What we're witnessing in Nicaragua is the imposition, with ever-increasing intensity, of a pro-Soviet dictatorship, serving as a base camp for the spread of communism in our hemisphere. 
If we permit the Soviets, using the Sandinistas, to establish a beachhead on the American mainland and to spread their subversion, the free world will face a major challenge to the geopolitical balance of power. Economic instability, political subversion, and terrorism and a flood of refugees will likely be the price of our paralysis. We could turn around one day and find a string of pro-Soviet dictatorships in Central America and a threat to our southern border


Remarks on Presenting the Congressional Gold Medal to Elie Wiesel and on Signing the Jewish Heritage Week Proclamation 
April 19, 1985

Today we work on and on to help Soviet Jewry, which suffers from persecution, intimidation, and imprisonment within Soviet borders. We will never relinquish our hope for their freedom, and we will never cease to work for it. If the Soviet Union truly wants peace, truly wants friendship, then let them release Anatoly Shcharanskiy and free Soviet Jewry


Radio Address to the Nation on the Central American Peace Proposal 
April 20, 1985

A vote against our proposal, however, could mean the beginning of the end to all hopes of peace and democracy in Central America. Already, the followers of Qadhafi and the Ayatollah Khomeini are in Nicaragua-about 2 hours by air from United States borders. And just this week, we confirmed the presence of Russian military personnel in the battle zones of northern Nicaragua

The Soviet terrorist-bloc nations know what is at stake in Nicaragua. That's why, in the 7 months since Congress cut off aid to the democratic resistance, they've been pouring in weapons and personnel to their Communist allies, hoping to wipe out the democratic forces while they're most vulnerable

The opponents of our plan in the House have announced a formula for turning the democratic resistance into homeless refugees. Their alternative to a plan for peace and democracy would only provide assistance to the democratic forces if they abandon their struggle to liberate Nicaragua—in other words, surrender to communism. They would, in fact, aid the Soviet-Cuban. Sandinista effort to get rid of the democratic resistance. 
Let me speak plainly. Any proposal that abandons over 15,000 members of a democratic resistance to Communists is not a compromise; it's a shameful surrender. If Congress ever approves such a proposal, it would hasten the consolidation of Nicaragua as a Communist-terrorist arsenal. And it would give a green light to Soviet-sponsored aggression throughout the American mainland, ultimately threatening our own security.

Address to the Nation on the Federal Budget and Deficit Reduction 
April 24, 1985

Our plan establishes clear national priorities. It keeps what should be kept and cuts what should be cut. Our first priority must always be our national security. The Soviets are far more dangerous today than during the Fifties and sixties, periods in which we devoted far more to our defense. And they continue arming well beyond the defense needs of their country. Because of that threat, we must maintain modest but steady growth each year. Three percent is the rock-bottom level that we must maintain for effective deterrence to protect our security


Interview With Foreign Journalists 
April 25, 1985
The President. Is it strong enough? I think basically—for a deterrent, yes. There is no question we do not match the Soviet Union in its military buildup, either in the strategic or in the conventional. But I think in the sense of a deterrent that a war, trying to take advantage of their superior forces, they would face more damage than they would want to accept. So, I think that from a deterrent standpoint—yes. 
The President. we've not stopped that on a basis of changing a policy—no. We're going forward with that plan. Those countries requested those weapons of us, and the Soviets have continued to augment their intermediate-range weapons that are targeted on European targets. 
No, we would like, in the talks going on at Geneva, we would like something that would indicate that they were willing to reduce those. You know, our original proposal on the intermediate-range weapons was total elimination, zero-zero. Well, we gained half our point. The Soviets agreed to zero for us, but not zero for them. But we're going to continue. 
Incidentally, I want you to know also that SDI and the research that's going forward is not just aimed at strategic weapons, such as a protection for ourselves. It would be very definitely a factor with regard to those SS20's, those Soviet intermediate-range weapons, for protection of the allies.
The President. Well, I think it was in keeping with what has been the Soviet attitude on other things of that kind, including the shooting down of the Korean airliner. We certainly, out in the Western World, I don't think can quite understand that kind of attitude. 
I think they missed a great opportunity to achieve some stature in the world by not admitting that this was a most regrettable thing and a tragic thing and extending an apology to the widow and child of the major and, yes, offering some compensation. 
The President. I'd be very willing to. I've expressed the belief that we should have a meeting, and his letter to me acknowledged that and said that he felt the same way. Now, I don't know what his schedule—he will be coming here for the United Nations—whatever it is, if that should be the time. I certainly could arrange mine to accommodate and have that meeting. And one of the reasons why I think such a meeting should take place is that I've always believed that people get in trouble when they're talking about each other instead of when they're talking to each other. 
The President. Well, I think that when we meet there should be some open discussion about some of these differences, some of the things that cause us all to be suspicious of each other, and see if we can't get some things out in the open on the table so that we understand each other better

Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States 
April 29, 1985

Option two is to make radical cuts in defense spending. In consultation with the Senate leadership, we have agreed to cut our proposed increase in defense spending down to 3 percent. But we've concluded that it be cut no further. The military might of the Soviets is growing. We simply cannot afford to break off our program to modernize our forces, and we dare not place in jeopardy weapons systems that are central to American security. Keeping our country secure is government's first job, and as long as I'm President, I intend to see that job gets done


Remarks at the Annual Republican Senate/House Fund-raising Dinner 
May 16, 1985

Some Democrats, in their effort to torpedo any constructive budget compromise, are proposing drastic cuts in defense that would seriously threaten our country's national security and tax increases that could strangle our economic prosperity. We had a referendum on that idea last November. The American people overwhelmingly rejected it. We've already compromised greatly on defense by agreeing to freeze spending at last year's levels with only an adjustment for inflation. Now, this was not an easy decision. There's no question about it, this will temporarily slow down our vitally needed defense buildup at a time when the Soviet Union is pouring unprecedented amounts of resources into their offensive military arsenals. But I've been assured that if I feel our national security is imperiled, I can come back to Congress for supplemental appropriations. Our leaders in the Senate have assured me of that. And if the Congress persists in making further reductions which could jeopardize our negotiating position in Geneva, I may take them up on that offer

And I notice that many in our House of Representatives had second thoughts about their vote to block aid to the freedom fighters when Mr. Ortega immediately flew off to Moscow for what looked like a victory celebration. Mr. Ortega, of course, was looking for another installment on that almost $2 billion in military and economic assistance the Soviets and their friends have been pouring into Nicaragua to prop up the brutal Communist regime there


Remarks at the Convention of the National Republican Heritage Groups Council 
May 17, 1985

And yes, we have to continue to state in public the crucial moral distinctions between democratic government and the totalitarian state. And much of this will depend on how the Republican Party fares in the next few years. And once again I think the prognosis—but only with your help—is an optimistic one. Our party has been unstinting in its support of democratic development and the struggle against totalitarianism. We've led the way in supporting the resistance movements in Nicaragua and Afghanistan. And we can be proud that in supporting a strong defense, Radio Liberty, Radio Free Europe, and in being realistic about Soviet intentions, our party, the Republican Party, has led the way


Radio Address to the Nation on Armed Forces Day and Defense Spending 
May 18, 1985

I'm sure you've read about the discussions going on in the Congress on military spending. I'll reserve comment on them until the Congress has completed its current work, but I do want to say this much: One of the things that has most deeply disturbed Americans during the past decade, even though it isn't always talked about as much as other political issues, was the expansion of Soviet influence beyond their borders-Angola, Ethiopia, Cambodia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua are cases in point. This trend was of natural concern to the American people, especially right here on the continent.


Remarks Following Discussions With President Roberto Suazo Cordova of Honduras 
May 21, 1985

I expressed to President Suazo my personal appreciation for his government's strong support for our policies in Central America. Our two governments share serious concern over the threat to the entire region posed by the Communist Sandinista regime in Nicaragua and its Cuban and Soviet supporters. President Suazo and I renewed ourcommitment to face this challenge together and to counter aggression and subversion


Remarks at the Annual Conference of the Council of the Americas 
May 21, 1985

I have to interrupt right here and tell you that on one of my visits—I won't name him; I don't want to embarrass him—but one of the heads of state that I met with on this visit, he gave me one while I was on the way. He told me the story about the two fellows in the Soviet Union who were walking down the street, and the one of them says, "Have we really achieved full communism? Is this it? Is this now full communism?" And the other one said, "Oh, hell no, things are going to get a lot worse." 

One of the most damaging lies of our era is the falsehood that people must give up freedom to enjoy economic progress, which makes me think of a story—everything makes me think of a story— [laughter] -about three dogs, an American dog and a Polish dog and a Russian dog. And they were all having a visit, and the American dog was telling them about how things were in this country. He said, "You know, you bark, and if you have to, you bark long enough, and then somebody comes along and gives you some meat." And the Polish dog said, "What's meat?" [Laughter] The Russian dog says, "What's bark?" 



Address at the United States Naval Academy Commencement Exercises in Annapolis, Maryland 
May 22, 1985

Since the end of the Second World War, American military might has been an immensely positive force in the world. We used our economic resources to help rebuild the devastated homelands of our allies and of our former enemies as well. Those people, wherever they are in this world, who've enjoyed therights to speak and to pray and to direct the course of their government through democratic elections owe their freedom to one degree or another to the protection of the United States military. It doesn't take much imagination to know how different things would be had the Soviet Union, not the United States, militarily and economically dominated the world after 1945. 
There are some who analyze world events who operate under the assumption that the United States and the Soviet Union are morally equivalent. This reasoning does a great disservice to our forefathers and all the brave individuals throughout our history who have fought and died to keep this country free. The United States is a democratic nation of free people. We are a far more moral and decent land than any totalitarian state, and we should be proud of it. 
And how did the Soviets seize this historic opportunity for better relations? They raced forward with the largest peacetime military expansion in history. They built almost three times as many ships as we did in the 1970's, turning what had once been a navy aimed at coastal defense into an offensively designed, blue-water navy—a formidable threat to peace and stability throughout the world. The Soviet's Pacific fleet alone now has more than 500 vessels, including two aircraft carriers and more than 130 submarines. 
There had been theories that Soviet belligerence would wane as their relative strength to the United States increased. Those theories went by the wayside in the late 1970's as Soviet advisers and military equipment, along with thousands of Cuban surrogate troops, poured into Africa; Soviet tanks invaded Afghanistan. A weaker America did not mean a more peaceful world. That's about as likely as Army stealing the statue of Tecumseh. [


Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers 
May 24, 1985

Nicaragua is another pawn in the Soviet grand strategy of expansion—a direct challenge to America just 700 miles from our territory. Already more than 250,000 Nicaraguans have fled, many flooding into Costa Rica and Honduras. If the Sandinistas, the Communists, are allowed to export their violence, the flood will grow and our Southern States could become virtual refugee camps for hundreds of thousands—even millions—of the dispossessed


Remarks at a Fund-raising Dinner for Senator Paula Hawkins in Miami, Florida 
May 27, 1985

Well, like it or not, that's the kind of bizarre logic that will carry the day if the other party regains control of the Senate. But with a Republican majority, we can count on common sense and courage to rule the day. Republicans know it is strength, not weakness, that will ensure the peace. We are fully aware of the threat communism poses to human freedom. And don't let anyone tell you we're morally equivalent with the Soviet Union. I have heard that term used in places. This is a democratic country of free people, a democratic country where all people enjoy theright to speak, to worship God as they choose, and live without fear. We are morally superior, not equivalent, to any totalitarian regime, and we should be darn proud of it


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters Following Discussions With King Hussein I of Jordan 
May 29, 1985

The President. Well, I'm not going to respond to that question because, as I say, we're still discussing this whole matter, and I'm not going to get into any great details—things of that kind. 
The President. As I say, just generally, we're discussing and hopeful at arriving at a solution.


Remarks at a Fund-raising Luncheon for Senator Don Nickles in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 
June 5, 1985

Peace through strength rests on a secure foundation of values. Don't let anyone tell you that we're morally equivalent to the Soviet Union. This is a democratic country of free people. A democratic country where all of us enjoy theright to speak, to worship God as we please, and to live without fear. We're not equivalent—we're far superior to any totalitarian regime, and we should be darn proud of it. 
Just south of our border we face a major challenge to democracy and our own security from Soviet-sponsored subversion and aggression. I'm happy to report that Don Nickles is one Senator who didn't have to wait until the dictator of Nicaragua went to Moscow before he knew he was a Communist. 
Congress can no longer ignore the obvious: The Soviet-bloc nations and their terrorist allies are pouring in weapons and ammunition to establish a beachhead on our own doorstep. Top defectors from the El Salvadoran guerrillas have given us detailed information about the guidance, the training, the funds, and the ammunition that they receive from the Communists in Nicaragua to overthrow the El Salvadoran democratic government that they have finally achieved. It was a dark day for freedom when, after the Soviet Union spent $500 million to impose communism in Nicaragua, the United States Congress could not support a meager $14 million for the freedom fighters in Nicaragua who were opposed to that totalitarian government


Remarks at a Fund-raising Dinner for Senator Mack Mattingly in Atlanta, Georgia 
June 5, 1985

If our country's not secure, nothing else has any meaning. Today, we as a nation face a challenge to our south. If we have the courage to do what is right, we can avoid a crisis. Inaction and lack of resolve are not the answer. The Soviet Union has poured hundreds of millions of dollars in military arms and equipment down there. We must assist those friendly governments under attack and help them defend themselves. And we must lend our support to those freedom fighters struggling for democracy in Nicaragua


Remarks at a Fund-raising Luncheon for Senator Jeremiah Denton in Birmingham, Alabama 
June 6, 1985

When it comes to the Communists and what they're doing to their country, well, Daniel Ortega's money-run to the Soviet Union should have come as no surprise. Still, for many, it took this last trip to dispel their final illusions and to make it clear that the Nicaraguan Communists are no more and no less than agents of Soviet expansionism and the sworn enemies of freedom
Totalitarian ideologies, in their drive to subvert human nature, will always be hostile to the family and its transcendent loyalties. We have seen that today in Russian totalitarianism; the taking over of the children by the state, the virtual elimination of family control. But free and democratic nations must be sure to honor, protect, and nourish their families as if their very survival depended on it, because in truth it does



Radio Address to the Nation on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
June 8, 1985

In the House some claim that the U.S. plans to become militarily involved in Central America. Well, no such plan exists. That charge is simply a distraction from the two paramount questions that must be faced by every Member: Will you support those struggling for democracy? Will you resist the Soviets' brazen attempt to impose communism on our doorstep or won't you?

Just 6 years ago, the people of Nicaragua-students, labor unions, businessmen, and the church—fought for a democratic revolution, only to see it betrayed by a handful of Soviet-backed Communists. We must not sit by while the Nicaraguan people are saddled with a Communist dictatorship that threatens this entire hemisphere. A House vote for humanitarian aid to the freedom fighters will send a strong bipartisan message that we will not tolerate the evolution of Nicaragua into another Cuba nor will we remain with our heads in the sand while Nicaragua becomes a Soviet client state with military installations constructed for use by the Soviet bloc. 
A Soviet base in Nicaragua would give the Russians a foothold on the American mainland. America's proudest moments have come when Democrats and Republicans united for the cause of democracy. That is the path which is succeeding in El Salvador, and that is the path that will succeed in Nicaragua, too, if we support the bipartisan proposal to aid the freedom fighters.


Interview With Arab Journalist Nasser Eddin Nashashibi 
June 11, 1985

The President. I believe the Soviet Union's influence in the Middle East should be commensurate with its willingness to play a constructive role in solving the problems of the region. But the Soviets have been anything but constructive, a fact often noted by the leaders of the region.

The President. The parallel with arms negotiations is interesting. I sincerely wish that the parties to the conflict in the Middle East would sit down together at a table and negotiate, and I believe that we are moving in that direction. The most important point in your parallel is that both we and the Soviets agreed that arms control negotiations should be face to face. We know that we don't agree in our positions, and we are not sure of the outcome, but we are convinced of the value in trying to work toward an agreement by talking directly. The need in the Middle East is for the parties to decide for themselves that they wish to pursue a just and lasting peace through direct negotiations. 
The President. This is really two separate questions. The first is: Why do we feel an international conference will not contribute to a peaceful settlement? Our view is that, as a practical matter, an international conference will result only in political theater and would not contribute to solutions. Only direct negotiations can achieve real results. We understand Jordan's need for a supportive international context in which to begin direct negotiations. We will continue our discussions with both Jordan and Israel in order to ascertain how such a context can best be provided. 
The second question relates to the willingness of the Soviets to contribute to solutions to problems in the Middle East. We have indicated on any number of occasions that we would welcome a constructive approach by the Soviet Union to the problems of the region. We have also made clear what kind of activities we believe would be constructive. So far, however, their approach has been anything but helpful, and we see no indications their approach will change. 
The President. That is a question for Mr. Gorbachev to answer. For our part, we believe that our two countries should seek to contribute to the peaceful resolution of disputes in crucial regions rather than making them more dangerous. We also believe that we should seek to avoid confrontations over these issues. That is why I proposed periodic consultations between our respective experts on some of these problems. Our hope is that such talks can help prevent misunderstandings that might result in confrontation. We have had such discussions on southern Africa and the Middle East. While these talks have been useful, they have not yet revealed any greater willingness on the Soviets' part to promote rather than impede peaceful solutions
The President. The war in Afghanistan is the result of the presence of over 115,000 Soviet troops who are trying to subjugate the Afghan people. There is only one solution to the problem—the complete withdrawal of Soviet troops. A negotiated political settlement remains the goal of U.S. policy. 
The Soviet forces at their present levels cannot defeat the Afghan resistance, but the resistance cannot hope to expel the Soviet Army from Afghanistan. What is needed is to move from the battlefield to the negotiating table. We fully support the Government of Pakistan's strong resistance to cross-border intimidation. 
We are encouraged that the United Nations has announced another round of indirect or proximity talks on Afghanistan for late June in Geneva. It is our hope that progress can be made there toward a settlement although the recent increase in Soviet military activity does not lead to optimism. In contacts with the Soviets at various levels, we have stressed our support for a negotiated political settlement. We will certainly continue to make the point in our future discussions with Soviet officials



Toasts at the State Dinner for Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India 
June 12, 1985

We welcome the negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union at Geneva and hope that their deliberations will lead to positive results. Nonalignment has been a positive force for peace; it stands for friendship and cooperation with all. Any nation's independence must include the option to steer clear of bloc identification. One friendship need not be at the cost of another. We want to enlarge cooperation between our two countries in numerous fields


Remarks at a Flag Day Ceremony in Baltimore, Maryland 
June 14, 1985

I would interject here, right now—I have a letter which I treasure very much. It is a full letter. It is on a slip of paper only 2 1/2 inches long and just under an inch in height. But on that is penned a letter, which can only be read with a magnifying glass, and then, in my case, had to be translated, and there are 10 names affixed in signature to that tiny letter. It was smuggled out of a labor camp in the Soviet Union. It was signed by 10 women in that camp who have gone through hunger strikes in their desire for freedom. And the reason they wrote me was to tell me that we, in the United States, represented to them the hope that one day there would be freedom throughout the world. I'm going to keep that letter for as long as I live


The President's News Conference
June 18, 1985
The President. I have to be optimistic and think there will. All I know is that I, feeling that it was our turn, issued the invitation for such a meeting. And there has been, evidently, expressions that—willing to have such a meeting, and discussions are going on with regard to time and place. But I can't give you any report on where those negotiations have taken us.
Now—


Remarks at the Annual Convention of the Lions Club International in Dallas, Texas 
June 21, 1985

These are the kind of statistics that underscore the true strength of our country. And much of this philanthropy, in keeping with our traditions, is aimed at helping the less fortunate in other countries. When famine raised its ugly head in Ethiopia, Americans rushed to aid those in need. So far this year the United States has donated 425,000 tons of food. This compares to a paltry 2,500 tons donated by Communist Ethiopia's closest ally, the Soviet Union. It seems with all their sloganeering about the only things Communist countries produce in quantity are misery, weapons, and aggression. The record of humanitarian assistance provided by the Soviet bloc governments, even to their own allies, is a disgrace, and the world, especially the developing world, should know about it. Of course, Communist countries have trouble producing even enough food for their own populations. 
You know, there's a story—I kind of collect stories that I understand and I can convert—I mean, I can convince myself are true that are being told among the Russian people to each other, and this one has to do with a commissar who visited a collective farm, grabbed the first fellow that was walking by, and said, "How are things going? Are there any complaints?" And the farmer he grabbed says, "Oh, comrade commissar, I've never heard anyone complain." And the commissar said, "Well, how are the crops? .... Oh, sir, they've never been better." "How about potatoes?" He said, "Comrade commissar, if the potatoes were put in one pile, they would reach the foot of God." And the commissar said, "Just a minute. This is the Soviet Union; there is no God." And the worker said, "That's all right. There are no potatoes." 


Radio Address to the Nation on Counterintelligence Activities 
June 29, 1985

One of those challenges is our need to counter the rash of spy activities that threaten our security and interests at home and abroad and to improve our own intelligence-gathering capabilities. The number and sophistication of Soviet bloc and other hostile intelligence service activities have been increasing in recent years. 
The Soviet Union is a closed society whose rulers fear the intoxication of freedom, indeed fear it so much they forbid their people to compete freely with us in the great race to create and invent our future for the 21st century. As the West pulled ahead, the Soviets embarked on a major effort to catch up by stealing or buying what they need from classified information on American satellites, reports on future weapon systems, including our combat aircraft bombers, to our most advanced technologies from high-tech areas like Silicon Valley in California. 
Besides espionage against our most sensitive secrets, theft of the high technology upon which our defense depends, the Soviets have intensified what they call "active measures"—propaganda and disinformation meant to mislead Western governments and their citizens, subversion, forgeries, and covert action. For example, while American officials and other proponents of freedom are systematically excluded from Soviet radio or TV, hardly a week goes by without a so-called Soviet journalist or scholar on our own airwaves. These men and women should at least be identified for what they are—propagandists whose appearances and statements are totally controlled by the Communist Party. 
The Soviets, Communist-bloc nations, and surrogates elsewhere rely on a huge apparatus, including the KGB, to spy on us and influence our public opinion. To equate the KGB with the CIA is an injustice to the CIA and a grave mistake. Far more than an intelligence service, the KGB is a political police operation. As its motto says, "The sword and shield of the Communist Party of the U.S.S.R." The KGB mission to shield the rigid Soviet dictatorship from any internal challenge, to weaken and discredit the United States and the various alliances we've built up, particularly the NATO alliance, and to advance the Soviet quest for power to destroy freedom makes it unique in the world. 
What can be done? Well, we can counter this hostile threat and still remain true to our values. We don't need to fight repression by becoming repressive ourselves, by adopting such restrictions as internal passports for our citizens. But we need to put our cleverness and determination to work, and we need to deal severely with those who betray our country. We should begin by recognizing that spying is a fact of life and that all of us need to be better informed about the unchanging realities of the Soviet system. We're in a long twilight struggle with an implacable foe of freedom. 
Next, we need to reduce the size of the hostile intelligence threat we're up against in this country. Some 30 to 40 percent of the more than 2,500 Soviet-bloc officials in this country are known or suspected intelligence officers and all can be called upon by the KGB. We need to bring the number of their intelligence officers to a more manageable number. We need a balance between the size of the Soviet diplomatic presence in the United States and the U.S. presence in the Soviet Union. The Soviets currently have a huge advantage. Now, we intend to take steps to accomplish this, and we need to better control foreign intelligence agents working at the U.N., who have utilized that organization as a spy nest.


Remarks at the Annual Convention of the American Bar Association 
July 8, 1985

Now, the question of the Soviet Union's close relationship with almost all of the terrorist states that I have mentioned and the implications of these Soviet ties on bilateral relations with the United States and other democratic nations must be recognized. So, too, Secretary of State Shultz in his speech of June 24th of last year openly raised the question of Soviet support for terrorist organizations, as did Secretary Haig before him. 
With regard to the Soviet Union, there is one matter that I cannot let go unaddressed today. During the recent hostage crisis in Beirut—39 Americans were brutally kidnaped; an American sailor was viciously beaten; another American sailor stomped and shot to death; the families and loved ones of these hostages undergo indescribable suffering and a sense of distress, anger, and outrage spreading through our nation like a prairie fire—the Soviet Union made some official comments through its government-controlled press. The Soviet Government suggested that the United States was not sincerely concerned about this crisis, but that we were, instead, in the grip of-and I use the Soviets' word here—"hysteria." The Soviet Union also charged that the United States was only looking for a—and, again, I use their word—"pretext" for a military—and, again, I use their word—"invasion." Well now, ladies and gentlemen of the American Bar, there is a non-Soviet word for that kind of talk. [Laughter] It's an extremely useful, time-tested original American word, one with deep roots in our rich agricultural and farming tradition. 
I can't close without telling you one little incident here. When I say we are a symbol of hope—I have on my desk at home a letter signed by 10 women in the Soviet Union. They are all in a prison camp in that Union—a labor camp. The letter is no more than 2 1/2 inches wide and just an inch high, and yet, by hand, they wrote a complete letter, signed their 10 names to it, smuggled that and another document just a little bigger—about a 3-inch square of paper-that is the chart of the hunger strikes they have endured. And they smuggled it out to be sent to me because they wanted to tell me and all of you that the United States, where they are, in that prison, still remains their hope that keeps them going—their hope for the world



Radio Address to the Nation on the Strategic Defense Initiative 
July 13, 1985

In a television address to the Nation on March 23, 1983, I challenged the scientific community to change the course of history by embarking on a research effort to counter Soviet threats with measures purely defensive—measures to reassure people their security no longer depends alone on threats of mutual nuclear annihilation to deter a Soviet attack, but measures enabling us to intercept and destroy ballistic missiles before they reach our soil or that of our allies. A nonnuclear strategic defense makes good sense. It's better to protect lives than to avenge them. But another reason, equally simple and compelling, persuades us to its merit. As the Book of Luke says: "If a strong man shall keep his court well guarded, he shall live in peace." Well, SDI, our Strategic Defense Initiative, could prove crucial to guarding security and peace for America and her allies. 
The strategic challenges we face are far different from those in 1972, when the United States and the Soviet Union signed the SALT I and antiballistic missile treaties. When those treaties were signed, certain assumptions about the Soviets were made that—well, to put it charitably—have not proven justified. For example, it was assumed the treaties would lead to a stable balance and, ultimately, to real reductions in strategic arms. But the Soviet Union has never accepted any meaningful and verifiable reductions in offensive nuclear arms-none. It was assumed the treaties were based on acceptance of parity in offensive weapons systems, but the Soviets have continued to race for superiority. As former Secretary of Defense Harold Brown put it, "When we build, they build. When we stop, they build." It was assumed the Soviets would accept the innocent notion that being mutually vulnerable to attack was in our common interest. They haven't. 
The Soviets have repeatedly condemned as provocative our research on defense against their first-strike missiles, while blanketing their own country with the most sophisticated air defense system ever seen to protect against our second-strike bombers. And while we dismantled our lone ABM system 10 years ago, the Soviets have consistently improved the world's only missile defense system deployed around Moscow. They've also developed and deployed the world's only operational killer satellite system and then proceeded to condemn the United States for daring even to test such a weapon. 
It was assumed that an effective defense would not be feasible in 1972. But in that very year, Soviet Marshal Grechko testified to the Supreme Soviet: "The treaty on limiting ABM systems imposes no limitations on the performance of research and experimental work aimed at resolving the problem of defending the country against nuclear missile attack." Thus, the Soviets have devoted a huge share of their military budget to a sophisticated strategic defense program which, in resources already allocated, far exceeds what the United States anticipates spending in the current decade. 
Finally, it was assumed that the agreements signed would be complied with, but the Soviets are seriously violating them in both offensive and defensive areas. It is the Soviet Union that has violated the 1972 ABM treaty with its construction of a massive radar facility at Krasnoyarsk. Further, the Soviet Union has tested and deployed sophisticated air defense systems which we judge may have capabilities against ballistic missiles. 
Given these facts, is it not preposterous for the Soviets, already researching defense technologies for two decades, to now condemn our embryonic SDI program? And as Paul Nitze, one of my chief arms control advisers, pointed out, Soviet hypocrisy is even more glaring when we realize who's taking advantage of our open society to propagandize against our SDI program. A letter to the New York Times denouncing SDI was signed by the very Soviet scientists who've been developing the Soviet strategic defense program; other Soviet scientists who signed have spent their entire careers developing offensive weapons. I intend to mention this when I meet with Mr. Gorbachev in Geneva this November. I will tell him the United States not only has theright to go forward with research for a strategic missile defense, but in light of the scale of their program we'd be the greatest fools on Earth not to do so. 
We're going to put our best scientists to work. We're going to cooperate with our allies. We're going to push forward in full compliance with the ABM treaty on a broad-based research program, whose results to date are immensely encouraging. And, yes, I hope we will one day develop a security shield that destroys weapons, not people.

Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters 
August 5, 1985

In foreign affairs, we've turned the tide of gradual Soviet expansion so evident 5 years ago. Our alliances are stronger, and we have regained our position of leadership, working to resolve the international debt burden, carrying the flag for the spread of democracy, and seeking real gains on key global issues from human rights to nonproliferation. At Geneva we're in the best position in more than a generation to achieve real reductions of nuclear weapons. All we need is a serious approach by the Soviets. I look forward to my meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev in Geneva this November

The Soviet Union is ahead of us in the development and the modernization of nuclear weapons. They have just finished their tests, or they even have a couple left they might try to sneak in before the 6th, which was their opening date. But they had finished their tests on their 24's and 25's, the 18, which is comparable to our MX. And we have not yet begun the testing and certainly haven't completed it in some of our weapons of that same type to keep pace with them. 
So, their suggestion for a mutual—first of all, for a single moratorium for several months—they finished their tests; they don't have any more to do. Their asking us to make it mutual meant that we would then not be able to catch up with them. And we've had an example of that back in the Kennedy era, and this had to do with the testing with regard to ABM's and so forth. And we were begging for a treaty, and the Soviet Union kept refusing. And they'd completed the tests, and then the Congress passed a go-ahead for us. And the Soviets immediately said to President Kennedy, "Oh, yes, we're willing to talk now about a moratorium on testing


Remarks at a California Republican Party Fund-raising Dinner in Los Angeles 
August 22, 1985

Looking to the future, we're moving forward with research on a project that offers us a way out of our nuclear dilemma—the one that has confounded mankind for four decades now. The Strategic Defense Initiative research program offers us the hope of protecting ourselves and our allies from a nuclear ballistic missile attack. This will permit us to shift our focus to saving lives, rather than avenging them. We seek an antinuclear shield, using technology to make us safer. Our success will be measured by the number of people we can save, not destroy. We keep hearing some self-declared experts and some of those blame-America-first crowd saying that our SDI concept is unfeasible and a waste of money. Well, if that's true, why are the Soviets so upset about it? As a matter of fact, why are they investing so many rubles of their own in the same technologies


Telephone Interview With Lockwood R. Doty of Washington Broadcast News, Inc. 
August 24, 1985

The President. Well, I'm looking forward to the talks with him, and I hope that it won't be just a session of trying to make some agreements on particular, specific issues, but that we can get right down to discussing the problems between us and an agenda for the future so that we can eliminate the hostilities and the suspicions, if that's possible. There's no question but that the Soviet Union has made it plain that they are embarked on an expansionist program. They believe in the one-world Communist state, the world revolution. But at the same time, you have to wonder if this is not based on their fear and suspicion that the rest of us in the world mean them harm. 
Now, I think that we can present evidence to show that we have no such intention and if we could discuss things from the standpoint that we're the only two nations in the world, I believe, that could start world war III. We're also the only two nations in the world that could bring about world peace, and I would think that that would be our task in history—to deal with that problem. And I'm going to do my best to present the evidence that would show and prove that this country has no intention of taking hostile action against them and also, however, that we believe we have good reason to believe—to think—that they do have hostile intent—their expansionism worldwide, their invasion of Afghanistan, and so forth. But I wish we could get that out on the table and, hopefully, reduce the suspicions between us


Telephone Interview With Bob Mohan of WSB Radio in Atlanta, Georgia 
August 24, 1985

The President. I have to say that for us to believe the Soviet Union is not, in its usual style, stirring up the pot and waiting in the wings for whatever advantage they can take—we'd be very innocent, naive, if we didn't believe that they're there—
The President.—ready to do that


Telephone Interview With Tomas Regalado of WRHC Radio in Miami, Florida 
August 24, 1985

The President. Ah. Well, actually, that was an agreement, an informal agreement; it had no legal standing. And it is true that the Soviet Union have observed the most important part, which was not replacing the nuclear missiles in Cuba or having any there. They have observed that. Almost from the beginning, however, there are other facets of that kind of informal agreement that have been violated: the use of Castro's forces throughout the world, such as in Angola and all; his interference in Central America and Latin America in attempts to get overthrows of legitimate, democratic governments and all. So, I don't see where there's any need to takeaction with regard to that particular agreement, but simply to deal with each issue as it comes up and what they are doing and what they're not doing. And what they're doing with regard to stirring up revolution in Central America is wrong for all the Americas, and I think all of us should oppose it

The President. We have—on more than one occasion—we have heard some proposals from the present Cuban Government about wanting a better relationship and wanting to discuss with us how that could come about. We've responded, and then we've found that, really, they had no concrete proposal. They were offering nothing. I do not believe that armed overthrow is the answer, but I believe that we should continue some of the restraints and restrictions that we have with regard to our relations with Cuba but, at the same time, make it evident that any time that they want to prove by deed, not just word, that they are willing and want to come back to the community of American nations, as they once were, we'd be very happy to help and to help open the door for that. But at the present time, they are openly a satellite of the Soviet Union and taking their orders from the Soviet Union, and we see no opening for us to be of help

The President. I would think that that subject could very well come up, because, as I view these talks with Mr. Gorbachev and our effort to try and lessen the hostility and see if we can't eliminate some of the suspicion that exists between the two countries there, I think very much that we would point out to him the contrast between our own conduct and what he is doing with regard to the Americas—or what his country is doing with regard to the Americas—by way of Cuba principally, and get that out on the table as one of the facets of the relationship that we think stands in the way of any better relationship with the Soviet Union.


Remarks Announcing the Latest Employment Statistics and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters 
September 6, 1985

The President. I know. [Laughter] 
The President. I'll take it up with him in November


