MID 17301, US v USSR, 10 jul 58 to 9-Aug-58 to 8-Sep-58



173 - Statement by the President following the Landing of United States Marines at Beirut.
July 15, 1958

Warned and alarmed by these developments, President Chamoun of Lebanon sent me an urgent plea that the United States station some military units in Lebanon to evidence our concern for the independence of Lebanon, that little country, which itself has for about two months been subjected to civil strife. This has been actively fomented by Soviet and Cairo broadcasts and abetted and aided by substantial amounts of arms, money and personnel infiltrated into Lebanon across the Syrian border

You will remember at the time of the Korean war that the Soviet Government claimed that this was merely a civil war, because the only attack was by North Koreans upon South Koreans. But all the world knew that the North Koreans were armed, equipped and directed from without for the purpose of aggression.


198 - The President's News Conference
August 6, 1958

As you know, both the United States resolution and the Japanese resolution were vetoed by the Soviet Union. 
But their history, which includes all of the eastern European nations that they have taken over by force and held by force since the conclusion of World War II, their adventures into North Korea and North Vietnam, all show and point to the fact that the accusation they made should be directed directly to themselves and not to us
There must be an equality in the sovereignty and in the rights of each nation to dictate its own affairs. So I would say in the United Nations these things should be done, and we would be prepared to go along with any decision of that kind. And, of course, we would hope that the Soviet Union not only would be prepared to do the same thing, but would actually observe its commitments. But I don't think that we ought merely to say, two or three great powers, "This is going to be the score." I do not believe that.








213 - The President's News Conference
August 20, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. No, we have no evidence that he is doing it. 
Now, we have had reports of comments that are made in the Kremlin and in Moscow, where there has been some rather vociferous denials of that allegation. But I would hesitate to make a real guess on it
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think there are two points: first, we did not say that we are going to have a big war if we don't stop this. I do say if they are going to continue it without any voluntary agreement of their own to limit or cease it, then I do say we are headed for much more trouble but not necessarily a big war. 
The next thing is this: finally, developing circumstances tend to point out where are the best interests of all countries served. 
I believe myself that if we can keep a sturdy course and a steady course, firm in what we believe to be right, finally even the Soviets begin to learn that it is not to their benefit to go in and try to buy, bribe, and subvert generally people that are themselves trying to live their own lives; because, finally, what all history shows, that when any dictatorship goes too far in its control, finally, whether it be the Roman Empire or Genghis Khan's or Napoleon's or anyone else's, just the very size of the thing begins to defeat them. 
So I think there are characteristics in this whole thing--accepting your premise that they probably are not going to cease it forthwith-that finally will teach them this is not really a good, profitable enterprise. But it does mean this also: we have got to keep on the job forever and forever with our own measures to make certain that these small countries and weaker countries do not fall one by one prey to their methods




222 - The President's News Conference
August 27, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, the principle of the policy has not been abandoned at all. 
Now, we did say this: that in order to facilitate the possibility of negotiations in this field, that if both sides would accept this report and would each agree to begin instantly to meet--October 31st is the date we mentioned--to start negotiations for measures that would lead further, then for one year we would not make any more tests. 
But we did couple that with the policy that we believe in, that the cessation of tests must be related to the cessation of production of this material for weapons purposes, and even further on than that eventually. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I think there is no change because we have believed--maybe I don't understand your question exactly. We said you cannot have an agreement on cessation of tests unless there can be technical methods that will make certain each to the other that we are acting in good faith. 
Now, that is the thing that the technical experts were deciding: is it possible; and if it is possible, what is the minimum system that will do it? 
We say, "All right, we are accepting that, now let's move on to the next negotiation," and, while we are doing that, that negotiation is the actual establishment of this system. 
That being done, now you have got it with that much of a testing, it looks like you have a step made into penetrating both these countries on an official basis--a good many stations in Eurasia, a good many stations here. 
Now, it would seem, there ought to be another step. But I think that for each one of the things that still has to be negotiated out, we have not changed our general program or plan
THE PRESIDENT. I say only this: when I came here, you will remember, we were talking about the "New Look." We were trying to get away from mere reliance upon manpower, and to use the latest in scientific inventions to defend this country, hoping thereby to save manpower. This took a long study, and after the first months, I finally appointed scientific committees, two in succession. finally there was brought forward a belief that we should go very heavily into ballistic missiles of long range, which had never before been brought to the fore in military planning. 
I believe--I think I am right--there never was more than $1 million a year used until that year. But in the spring of 1955, I believe, I listened to this latest scientific report, and this went on the very highest priority-expenditures put on a priority higher than that of any other of our defense things. 
From that moment on, there has been no place that I can see where there has been any possibility of gaps occurring. 
Development has been extraordinarily rapid in view of the few years we have had, and while procurement should never go so wild that it wants to purchase great, vast weapons until they are approved, I am quite certain that the Defense Department's programs are not only adequate, but really are generous in making certain that the United States in this one particular field is going faster than we could have expected. 
I want to bring this out: up to this moment, I don't see how you can begin to eliminate the manned carrier, the airplane, merely because there can be demonstrated a capacity for sending a warhead by a guided missile. There is still a long ways to go before the airplane, I would say, is made completely obsolete. So while, if there is any gap, I am quite certain that our enormous strength in fine long-range airplanes is--it isn't a "gap"; if the rate of development is not as rapid as you might see it, if you are talking just about money, and money won't do it in my opinion, the airplane takes care of that deficiency










