MID 222901, US v USSR, 1 Aug to 31-Aug-82 to 24-Jan-83



Remarks at the Annual Convention of the National Corn Growers Association in Des Moines, Iowa 
August 2, 1982

But the commitment I'm most proud to have kept has been mentioned here already by your Governor, and that was a more normal grain trading relationship with the Soviet Union, lifting the last administration's grain embargo. 
The lingering effects of that grain embargo are still hanging over the markets, and our nation's farmers are still suffering from those low prices. We had 70 percent of the Soviet market when the embargo was imposed. That fell to 25 percent during the embargo. At the same time, our competitors took advantage of this market that the last administration threw away. Well, we've restored to the American farmer a fair opportunity to export grain to the U.S.S.R. on a cash basis. We have already begun that difficult road

The lingering effects of that grain embargo are still hanging over the markets, and our nation's farmers are still suffering from those low prices. We had 70 percent of the Soviet market when the embargo was imposed. That fell to 25 percent during the embargo. At the same time, our competitors took advantage of this market that the last administration threw away. Well, we've restored to the American farmer a fair opportunity to export grain to the U.S.S.R. on a cash basis. We have already begun that difficult road. 
After lifting the embargo, we offered the Soviets an additional 15 million metric tons of grain beyond the original 8 million metric tons. Our efforts on behalf of the farmers suffered a setback, however, with the iron repression of the proud people of Poland. When martial law was declared in that country, U.S. officials were developing a negotiating position on a new long-term grain agreement with the U.S.S.R. After the Soviet Union ignored our calls to aid restoration of basic human rights in Poland, we had no choice but to impose a number of sanctions against both countries, including postponement of negotiations on a long-term trade agreement with the Soviet Union. 
There is still no cause to celebrate in Poland. I am, however, somewhat encouraged by indications martial law may be relaxing. We'll continue to watch developments there in the hope that life will improve for the Poles and sanctions can be removed. In the meantime we will explore a 1-year extension of the current long-term grain agreement with the Soviet Union. I have also authorized the Secretary of Agriculture to consult with the Soviets on the subject of additional grain sales beyond the minimum purchase requirements of the current agreement. 
The extension would have the sanctity of a contract, ensuring U.S. farmers access to the Soviet market. Just last week, the importance of this was brought home to me by the Governor of a great agricultural State, your neighbor Governor Charles Thone of Nebraska. As Governor Thone said [applause] . Somebody's here from Nebraska. As Governor Thone said, there must be no question about our respect for contracts. We must restore confidence in U.S. reliability as a supplier. An agreement would, also, protect Americans from possible Soviet disruption of our domestic market. 
Indications are that we'll sell a record volume of grain to the Soviet Union this year. With the extension that we're now exploring, we'll be able to sell large quantities during the next year. In other words, the granary door is open, and the exchange will be cash on the barrelhead. 


Question-and-Answer Session with Farmers in State Center, Iowa 
August 2, 1982

I think you are aware we did dispose of some to New Zealand, that went ahead and sold butter and products—I don't know where, probably some of it to the Soviet Union


Remarks at the Centennial Meeting of the Supreme Council of the Knights of Columbus in Hartford, Connecticut 
August 3, 1982

It is this latter problem that we had to confront when we came to Washington 18 months ago. In the last 10 years, Federal spending had tripled. In the last 5 years, Federal taxes had doubled. The philosophy of government seemed to be tax and tax, spend and spend. Now, no one can quarrel with the motive behind all this. It was well-intentioned and done in the name of humanity. The budget for the Department of Health and Human Services became the third largest budget in the world, right after the entire national budgets of the United States and the Soviet Union. The Federal debt reached $1 trillion, and our interest payments on that debt, in the range of a hundred billion dollars, are more than the entire Federal budget of about 20 years ago

The House of Representatives has before it now two resolutions on the nuclear freeze matter. One resolution, I regret to say, would, if passed, send a signal to the Soviet Union that we're willing to accept something less than these reductions that I spoke about. Indeed, this resolution would leave in place dangerous inequalities in the nuclear balance and would attempt to return us to the flawed SALT II agreement. 
On the other hand, a resolution proposed by Congressmen Broomfield, Carney, and Stratton would avoid these dangers and, if it is passed, would act as an incentive to persuade the Soviet Union to agree to mutual reductions. I strongly support the Broomfield, Carney, and Stratton resolution. 
As I mentioned, our arms control proposals are now the matter of delicate negotiations with the Soviet Union. But let me say this to you: The fact that the largest Catholic fraternal organization has spoken out strongly through your magazine Columbia on the morality of maintaining our strategic deterrence has been a great asset to our efforts for peace, and I thank you.
Our foreign policy has changed in one other important way. For many years, American foreign policy has suffered from a defensive posture, a shyness about the values and beliefs that form the heart of our political consensus and our civilization. Well, we're on the defensive no longer. The Soviet Union has challenged us to open competition in the realm of ideas and values, and we intend to take up that challenge. That is why when I recently spoke to the British Parliament, I called for a worldwide crusade for freedom and a global campaign for democracy. 
Now, I must say, my remarks on this occasion have not drawn rave reviews from the Soviet press. In fact, Pravda suggested that my remarks were hysterical and the work of an intellectual pygmy. [Laughter] And a Polish newspaper under the martial law there called it a cesspool of invectives, insults, and insinuation. Well, now, naturally, as a former actor, I'm somewhat sensitive about press notices like that. [Laughter] But you're probably wondering what upset our adversaries so. Well, the truth is, what upset them the most was a quotation I used from Lech Walesa, the now-imprisoned head of Solidarity in Poland



Address to the Nation on United States Policy for Peace in the Middle East 
September 1, 1982

When our administration assumed office in January of 1981, I decided that the general framework for our Middle East policy should follow the broad guidelines laid down by my predecessors. There were two basic issues we had to address. First, there was the strategic threat to the region posed by the Soviet Union and its surrogates, best demonstrated by the brutal war in Afghanistan, and, second, the peace process between Israel and its Arab neighbors. 
With regard to the Soviet threat, we have strengthened our efforts to develop with our friends and allies a joint policy to deter the Soviets and their surrogates from further expansion in the region and, if necessary, to defend against it.

Remarks at Kansas State University at the Alfred M. Landon Lecture Series on Public Issues 
September 9, 1982

Apply that philosophy to agriculture. American farmers were hurt badly and still have not recovered from the disruption their markets suffered from the grain embargo against the Soviet Union. We believe that government's proper role is to act as friend, partner, and promoter of American farmers and their products around the world. And, as promised, we lifted the embargo. The Soviets have accepted our offer to extend the grain agreement, requiring that they purchase at least 6 to 8 million metric tons, and we're willing to sell them a lot more


Remarks at a Kansas Republican Party Fund-raising Luncheon in Topeka 
September 9, 1982

Yes, we stepped up the defense spending. At the same time, we now have teams in Geneva, Switzerland, who are negotiating with the Soviet Union for outright reductions in strategic nuclear weapons. Nuclear freeze, yes—after we have reduced the number of weapons in the world and reduced the Soviet Union to no more than we, ourselves, have. 
But the very fact we have shown the will and intention of building up is what has brought the Soviet Union to the bargaining table. It was all explained in a cartoon, one of my favorite cartoons, one day. It was a cartoon of Brezhnev speaking to a Russian general and he was saying to the Russian general, "I liked the arms race better when we were the only ones in it." 

Now, I know there are people that when you say that they say, "Oh, see, look, he's a warmonger." Well, like many of you, I've seen four wars in my lifetime for our country. I don't want to see another one. I look at those young men when they're in formation outside for a ceremony there at the White House, and I say, "How could anyone think that anyone in this position would want to send those young men out into battle?" No. But the very presence of those men is what brings peace nearer. They are the peacemakers, because I don't think the Soviet Union would have been at the bargaining table in Geneva if they had not seen our determination to go ahead building up our ability to defend ourselves


Remarks at a Reception Marking the First Edition of USA Today 
September 15, 1982

And that came home to me just a little while ago, standing here thinking about the recent crackdown on dissidents in the Soviet Union, repression in Poland, the attack on press freedom in Nicaragua. Yet, here we are and you are with all the wizardry of American technology and, in the robust tradition of American journalism, about to bring something new to the world of communications, a potentially great newspaper. Forgive me, but I can't help but feel that this is a testimony to the kind of dreams free men and women can dream and turn into reality here in America


Remarks at the Swearing-In Ceremony for New United States Citizens in White House Station, New Jersey 
September 17, 1982

In the Soviet Union authorities routinely deny human rights to their citizens. Just last week, the Moscow [Ukrainian] Helsinki Monitoring Group, a human rights organization, was forced to disband because of persecution. But let us remember the continuing struggle for even the most basic rights in the Soviet Union as we celebrate the 195th anniversary of the signing of the American Constitution


The President's News Conference
September 28, 1982
The President. I think there's a pretty good understanding on their part as to where we stand. And I can only say this: In 20 months—and I'm going to knock on wood—the Soviet Union, which has been expanding over the years vastly in the territory and the people coming under its control, they haven't expanded into an extra square inch since we've been here. So, maybe we do have an understanding of each other. 
Now, today I've just had a call from George Shultz [Secretary of State]. He has met for 3 hours with Ambassador Gromyko and he said it was a serious discussion and a wide-ranging discussion and they're going to resume it on Monday. So, we're not standing off and ignoring each other

Remarks in Columbus to Members of Ohio Veterans Organizations 
October 4, 1982

In the previous 10 years Federal spending had tripled; in the last 5 years, Federal taxes had doubled. The budget for the Department of Health and Human Services, roughly $250 billion, became the third largest budget in the world. It came just after the entire national budget of the United States and of the Soviet Union. The Federal debt reached a trillion dollars, and the interest payments on that debt alone were in the range of a hundred billion dollars, which was just about as much as the entire Federal budget 20 years ago.

It is the nuclear freeze movement and the peace movement. Well, I, too, want a nuclear freeze after we have been able to negotiate the Soviet Union into a reduction on both sides of all kinds of weapons—and then have a freeze when we're equal and not freeze them now in a superiority that would bring closer the chance of nuclear war. [Applause] Thank you very much. Thank you


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Fund-raising Reception in Columbus, Ohio, for Gubernatorial Candidate Bud Brown 
October 4, 1982

But today we have three delegations in Europe negotiating with three Soviet delegations-one with regard to the medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe, one with regard to the strategic nuclear missiles that threaten us particularly in the world, and one that is trying to reduce the armaments, the conventional arms and weapons. And why are we so intent on this military or this defense buildup which had been allowed to—our defenses to deteriorate so? It's because they need back of them on their side of the table—they need the fellows on the other side of the table to have the knowledge that unless they join us in reducing those terrible weapons and the threat of war, they're going to have to face a United States that will do whateverisnecessary to ensure our safety and the peace of the world. They need a deterrence


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Meeting With Employees of AccuRay Corporation in Columbus, Ohio 
October 4, 1982

The President. Well, I think you can understand why I have to say I can't— [laughter] —specifically answer that question. [Laughter] I can tell you this: We are very much aware of the Russian development in that field, the experiments they've been conducting, and what they're trying to accomplish. And we aren't going to sit still and let them get away with it



Radio Address to the Nation on Solidarity and United States Relations With Poland 
October 9, 1982

The Polish military leaders and their Soviet backers have shown that they will continue to trample upon the hopes and aspirations of the majority of the Polish people. America cannot stand idly by in the face of these latest threats of repression and acts of repression by the Polish Government

There can only be one path out of the current morass in Poland, and that is for the military regime to stand up to its own statements of principle, even in the face of severe outside pressure from the Soviet Union; to lift martial law; release Lech Walesa and his colleagues now languishing in prison; and begin again the search for social peace through the arduous but real process of dialog and reconciliation with the Church and Solidarity


Radio Address to the Nation on Agriculture and Grain Exports 
October 15, 1982

Too often, people forget a basic fact of life: All those good things we enjoy come from the ache in your backs and your willingness to shoulder great personal risks. Right now, another fact of life in America's heartland is that things haven't been very good down on the farm. You who produce the food and fiber essential to life itself are carrying tremendous burdens—sometimes impossible burdens. U.S. agriculture is in the grip of a prolonged economic recession that began in 1980. The record inflation and interest rates of the late seventies and that mistaken Soviet grain embargo laid the seeds for a very different, bitter kind of harvest—a vicious cost-price squeeze and lost markets. Together, they eroded confidence and destroyed too many dreams for prosperity

As you know, our administration moved early on to end that grain embargo which had hurt farmers so badly. Before the Soviet embargo, American farmers were supplying about 70 percent of Soviet needs. After the embargo, our market share dropped to less than 25 percent. Other nations had quickly moved in to fill the gap left by the embargo, so that our farmers, and our farmers almost alone, bore the brunt of the embargo. This year, we've fought our way back to 35 percent of the Soviet market. We're on our way back up. We can and we will do better there and around the world

Today, I am directing Secretary of Agriculture Block to take two additional steps. Two weeks from now, U.S. representatives will meet with the Soviets in Vienna for talks concerning additional grain purchases beyond the 8 million metric tons stipulated in article i of the existing U.S.-U.S.S.R. grain agreement. I am instructing the Secretary to make available a total of 23 million metric tons for purchase during the October 1, 1982-September 30, 1983 time period. 
Second, the Secretary of Agriculture will extend to the additional purchases the same assurances of reliable delivery that the 8 million metric tons are afforded under article 2 of the agreement, if the U.S.S.R. will contract for the additional tonnage during the month of November, and provided that it is shipped within 180 days from the date of the contract. 
These same assurances, of course, also apply to soybean and other agricultural exports. We have a large crop. We need commitments to move that crop and strengthen markets. Now, of course, we can't guarantee the Soviets will make these purchases, but we know they're shopping, and they still have large needs. 
Now, some will say that by offering to sell the Soviets more grain we're sending a weak signal. That's wrong. We're asking the Soviets to give us cash on the line for the food they buy. We're not providing them with any subsidies or pumping any Western currencies into Soviet pockets. 
During the last decade, we had two grain embargoes. But during those same years we were also reducing ourcommitment to a strong national defense, while the Soviets were undertaking the most massive military buildup in history. We're not making that mistake in 1982; we have our priorities straight

Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session via Satellite to Republican Campaign Events 
October 18, 1982

The President. Tom, our sanctions have hurt the Soviet Union, and will hurt them even more. Actually—and I know, of course, that they have hurt some of our companies here at home. They've hurt in that that gas pipeline, when completed, is going to earn billions of dollars in hard, cold cash every year for the Soviet Union. And the Soviet Union, right now, is very hard pressed economically. This is going to make it possible for them to continue their great military buildup. 
Now, let me just say one thing, also, about the sanctions. We didn't set out to have that as our principle thing that we could do to the Soviet Union to show our anger about what they're promoting in Poland. We sent representatives to Europe to talk to our allies about some other things that we believe could be more punishing to the Soviet Union than these sanctions. And we Couldn't get agreement on those. 
We're trying again. If we can get a better set of restrictions other than the sanctions, we will be willing to lift those sanctions. 

Remarks at the Werries Family Farm in Chapin, Illinois 
October 20, 1982

And let me say that there's one other major promise of 1980 that we've also kept. We've lifted the weight of America's foreign policy from your already overburdened shoulders. We ended the Soviet grain embargo, as Jack just told you. 
Our farmers, I know, are among our most patriotic citizens. I know you care about freedom and a strong America. But American farmers once had a 70-percent share of the Soviet grain market. When the embargo was imposed, the Soviets still got their grain, but they bought it from our eager competitors. Today, we've worked our way back to a 35-percent share, but we have a long way to go to regain lost ground. We still are suffering the loss of about 80,000 potential jobs; farm prices are lower; and our economy is weaker. 
Next week, U.S. representatives will meet with the Soviets in Vienna to discuss additional grain purchases beyond the 8 million metric tons called for in our current agreement. And I've instructed Secretary Block to make available a total of 23 million tons in the coming year. The same assurances of reliable delivery that apply to the 8 million will go with the additional purchase of grain—up to 15 million tons—if the U.S.S.R. will buy the grain this November and provided the grain is shipped within 180 days of contract date. These assurances, of course, also apply to soybean and other agricultural exports


Remarks at an Illinois Republican Party Rally in Peoria 
October 20, 1982

I know they're not popular with Peoria or Bob Michel. But a President sometimes has to make decisions that are painful to even his best friends, and it's one of the toughest parts of the job. We must remember the sanctions were imposed as tangible evidence of our opposition to the Soviet inspired repression of the Polish people. But there were additional reasons, even had that not happened. 
It seemed to us that our European friends and allies were putting themselves in a dangerous position of dependency on an undependable provider, the Soviet Union, for the energy that would run their industry. And it also seemed to us that, inasmuch as that dependency would turn over about $10 billion a year in hard, cold cash to the Soviet Union, it would enable them to further build up their military might which is the greatest buildup of military might the world has ever seen. And so, we felt that something had to be done. The sanctions have substantially hurt the Soviet Union already, but, of course, they've hurt some of our own companies such as Caterpillar as well. 
The Siberian pipeline will be a major source, as I said, of hard cash income for the Soviet Union for decades, and I won't go into all the geopolitical reasons why that could be dangerous. I know it's the loss of jobs that's of more immediate concern to Peorians right now. 
We're receptive to alternative measures that would be equally or more effective than the current sanctions. Certainly, if we can establish restrictions that put greater pressure on the Soviets and less on our own companies, we will enthusiastically consider them. And we've been in constant consultations with our NATO allies trying to bring that about


Remarks at a Nebraska Republican Party Rally in Omaha 
October 21, 1982

Here in America's heartland, farmers are still paying dearly for the mistakes of the past. The sky-high inflation and interest rates of the late seventies and that mistaken Soviet grain embargo led to a vicious cost-price squeeze and lost markets. Confidence in America as a reliable supplier was shattered. Those in Washington forgot what Dwight Eisenhower once warned: "Without a prosperous agriculture there can be no prosperity in America." Well, we're remembering, and with your help, we're going to put the pieces back together

We didn't put that Soviet grain embargo on your farmers, but, as the Governor told you, we took it off. And as you heard last Friday, we want to sell the Soviets a lot more grain, a total of 23 million metric tons, and we will guarantee—give assurances of reliable delivery. And we share Governor Thone's determination to increase your exports throughout the world


Radio Address to the Nation on Economic and Budget Issues 
October 23, 1982

This administration is spending approximately three times as much on nondefense spending as the Kennedy administration spent in 1963, and that's even after you adjust the figures for inflation. Yes, we're doing everything we can to cut waste and root out cheaters. But the budget for the Department of Health and Human Services is greater than at any time in America's history. It amounts to 36.2 percent of the budget. It was only 33.8 percent of the 1980 budget. There are only two budgets in the world larger than our '83 Health and Human Service budget of $274.2 billion-the total budget for the United States and the Soviet Union


Remarks at a Montana Republican Party Rally in Great Falls 
October 28, 1982

And what a job we did face 21 months ago. In the last 10 years, Federal spending had tripled. In the last 5 years, Federal taxes had doubled. In 1980 alone, Federal spending had gone up 17 percent. The budget for the Department of Health and Human Services, the one that does all the charity programs and so forth, had become the third largest budget in the world, just after the national budgets of the United States—the total budget—and of the Soviet Union


Remarks at a New Mexico Republican Party Rally in Roswell 
October 29, 1982

I'd like to just tell you one little last thing about this. And it isn't meant to sound warlike because, as I say, I believe that it is in this way, it's this that has brought the Soviet Union into negotiations with two of our negotiating teams in Geneva, Switzerland, to try and reduce down—and hopefully to zero—the number of strategic weapons, nuclear weapons in the world. But I received a letter from our Ambassador to Luxembourg one day, and he said that he'd been up on the East German frontier and visiting the 2d Armored Cavalry Regiment. And he said a young trooper followed him over to his helicopter and asked him if he thought he could get a message to me. And the Ambassador allowed as how he could, and the young fellow said, "Will you tell him we're proud to be here, and we ain't scared o' nothin'


Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Giovanni Spadolini of Italy Following Their Meetings 
November 3, 1982

On the key issues of East-West trade, Prime Minister Spadolini and I agree that the United States, Italy, and the other allies must pursue discussions aimed at establishing a broad transatlantic consensus. Our trade and financial relations with the Soviet Union must take into account the nature of the Soviet conduct toward its neighbors. The Prime Minister shared with me Italy's special perspective in this regard. 
First, no undue gift to the Soviet Union as far as credits are concerned; [second], greater strictness in the transfer of technologies to the Soviet Union; third, implementation of a security net within the Western system so as to reduce the dependence on the Soviet Union concerning raw materials and energy products; fourth, the contracts that have already been signed by European countries concerning the pipeline must be honored, so as not to prejudge the credibility as far as the trade of the Western World is concerned. 
I will also present this same position in Paris in the very close meeting that I will have with President Mitterrand. The political solidarity between Europe and the United States that we want to defend at all costs also implies the overcoming of these conflicts which are not necessary and that we are having because of the Soviet Union

Remarks on Presenting the Presidential Citizens Medal to Raymond Weeks at a Veterans Day Ceremony 
November 11, 1982

Our goal is peace—peace that's achieved through a stable balance of forces, a mutual reduction of weapons, and a better understanding between the Soviet Union, the United States, and all nations. 
Earlier today, we received word of the death of Soviet President Brezhnev. And I want to read to you, if I might, the letter that I have sent this morning to Vasiliy Kuznetsov, First Deputy Chairman of the Presidium in Moscow. 
Now, I've said for many years there are fundamental differences between the Soviet system and our own system here in the United States. But I believe our peoples, for all our differences, share a desire and a dedication to peace. On this day, dedicated to American veterans, we honor the brave men and women who have by their service preserved our liberty. Our parades are a celebration of freedom. Our banner is Old Glory, and we hold her high and proud. This is the legacy of the brave men and women that we honor today.


The President's News Conference
November 11, 1982
I want to underscore my intention to continue working to improve our relationship with the Soviet Union. Our two nations bear a tremendous responsibility for peace in a dangerous time—a responsibility that we don't take lightly. Earlier this year, we put forth serious and far-reaching proposals to reduce the levels of nuclear and conventional forces. I want to reconfirm that we will continue to pursue every avenue for progress in this effort. But we shouldn't delude ourselves. Peace is a product of strength, not of weakness—of facing reality and not believing in false hopes. 
Today we honor American veterans-men and women who, by their courage and dedication, protected our freedom and independence. In the wake of events in the Soviet Union, we remain hopeful for a better relation. Conscious of our national interest and determined to remain a free people, I can think of no better day than Veterans Day to rededicate ourselves to peace and to do those things necessary to maintain the peace and to preserve our freedom. 
The President. Well, answering the last part first, no, I don't anticipate that as they make this transition. And we certainly can hope that there won't be anything of the kind. 
But with regard to the service, we've had no direct, official word yet on anything about the service, although we are in communication directly with them. And it was just a plain case of looking at schedules and my own schedule calling for visits here by a head of state next week, and it was felt that it would be better for George to head that delegation. But it will be an appropriate and a very distinguished delegation. 
The President. This is what we're considering now. No final decisions have been made, because, as I say, we're waiting to hear some word about the services. 2 
The President. Well, we've had periods of tension before. And I think you just—you can't guess that in advance or what the answer would be, except that I think we must remember that our goal is and will remain a search for peace, and we would try to find the best way to achieve that. And, incidentally, I believe that we can continue that search without my attendance at the services.
The President. We have been trying to do that in the area of quiet diplomacy, tried in the summit conference, tried in the NATO conference, of various things. We are prepared and ready—and they know that-about trying to have a better relation. But it's going to require some action, not just words. For 10 years detente was based on words from them and not any deeds to back those words up. And we need some action that they—it takes two to tango—that they want to tango also. 
The President. Well, there are some people that have said I took the first step with lifting the grain embargo. Have we gotten anything for it?
The President. Well, I don't think that the death of President Brezhnev is a factor in this—of what opportunities we might have. 
I have felt for a long time that we have an opportunity, because while the entire world, including the Soviet Union and ourselves, is involved in a deep recession and deep economic problems—all of us—it would seem to me that out of those troubles, that might be a time where, in a cooperative sense, we could find out that we'll all be far better off if we decide to get along with each other, instead of one pursuing an aggressive policy and the other one resisting that and so forth. 
So, I am optimistic that—and would have been without his death today—continue to be optimistic that we can get together
The President, Yes, there is plenty of evidence. It's even been published by some of your fraternity. There was no question but that the Soviet Union saw an advantage in a peace movement built around the idea of a nuclear freeze, since they are out ahead. And I want to emphasize again that the overwhelming majority of the people involved in that, I am sure, are sincere and well intentioned and, as a matter of fact, are saying the same thing I'm saying. And that is, we must have a reduction of those nuclear weapons, and that's what we're trying to negotiate now in Geneva. But to put the freeze first and then believe that we have not weakened our ease for getting a reduction, when the other side is so far ahead, doesn't make sense. 
But, yes, there has been in the organization of some of the big demonstrations, the one in New York and so forth, there is no question about foreign agents that were sent to help instigate and help create and keep such a movement going. 
The President. I can't go beyond what I've done, because I don't discuss intelligence matters, and that's what I would be getting into.

The President. Well, all of the these things are in the works, and that's why we have three teams negotiating—one on the matter of conventional arms, one on the matter of strategic missiles, and the other on the matter of the INF [Intermediate-range Nuclear Force], the zero option that I announced a year ago. But I tell you what I'd rather ask you to do and wait for is in the very near future I am going to be speaking in a major address on that entire subject
The President. Well, we are in negotiations and have been for some time on the East-West matter with our allies. And we are, at last, making what I think is sizable progress. 
I have nothing to announce as to any definition of that at the moment, but we've made progress. We started this long before there were sanctions. We started at Ottawa last year. We tried again in Europe in the two meetings there—in the summit meetings. We have continued. We had a team negotiating over there. We finally put the sanctions in effect. But we're discussing that relationship—or that arrangement with our partners without the sanctions playing any part in it. 
Our decision on the sanctions will be based on when we feel they've served their purpose and when we feel that there could be a better situation without them.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a White House Reception for Participants in the Youth Volunteer Conference 
November 12, 1982

You know, I've read a lot of constitutions. I guess every country's got a constitution. I've read the Soviet Constitution. I don't think they have. But I have. [Laughter] And there's a difference. Maybe this isn't true of all of them. But let me just tell you one great difference that spells out just what you are talking about and which goes with the dignity of being free


Radio Address to the Nation on East-West Trade Relations and the Soviet Pipeline Sanctions 
November 13, 1982

During the campaign 2 years ago, I spoke of the need for the United States to restore the balance in our relationship with the Soviet Union. For too many years we had stood still while the Soviets increased their military strength and expanded their influence from Afghanistan to Ethiopia and beyond. I expressed a belief, which you seemed to share, that it was time for the United States to chart a new course. Since then, we've embarked upon a buildup of our defense forces in order to strengthen our security and, in turn, to strengthen the prospects for peace. We still have a long way to go. But the fact that we've started on a new course has enabled us to propose the most comprehensive set of proposals for arms reduction and control in more than a quarter of a century. It's always been my belief that if the Soviets knew we were serious about maintaining our security, they might be more willing to negotiate seriously at the bargaining table. 
The balance between the United States and the Soviet Union cannot be measured in weapons and bombers alone. To a large degree, the strength of each nation is also based on economic strength. Unfortunately, the West's economic relations with the U.S.S.R. have not always served the national security goals of the alliance. 
The Soviet Union faces serious economic problems. But we—and I mean all of the nations of the free world—have helped the Soviets avoid some hard economic choices by providing preferential terms of trade, by allowing them to acquire militarily relevant technology, and by providing them a market for their energy resources, even though this creates an excessive dependence on them. By giving such preferential treatment, we've added to our own problems—creating a situation where we have to spend more money on our defense to keep up with Soviet capabilities which we helped create. 
Since taking office, I have emphasized to our allies the importance of our economic as well as our political relationship with the Soviet Union. In July of 1981 at the economic summit meeting in Ottawa, Canada, I expressed to the heads of state of the other major Western countries and Japan my belief that we could not continue conducting business as we had. I suggested that we forge a new set of rules for economic relations with the Soviet Union which would put our security concerns foremost. I wasn't successful at that time in getting agreement on a common policy.
Then in December of 1981 the Polish Government, at Soviet instigation, imposed martial law on the Polish people and outlawed the Solidarity union. This action showed graphically that our hopes for moderation in Soviet behavior were not likely to be fulfilled. 
In response to that action, I imposed an embargo on selected oil and gas equipment to demonstrate our strong opposition to such actions and to penalize this sector of the Soviet economy which relies heavily on high technology, much of it from the United States. In June of this year I extended our embargo to include not only U.S. companies and their products but subsidiaries of U.S. companies abroad and on foreign licensees of U.S. companies. 
Well, it's no secret that our allies didn't agree with this action. We stepped up our consultations with them in an effort to forge an enduring, realistic, and security-minded economic policy toward the Soviet Union. These consultations have gone on over a period of months. 
Well, I'm pleased today to announce that the industrialized democracies have this morning reached substantial agreement on a plan of action. The understanding we've reached demonstrates that the Western alliance is fundamentally united and intends to give consideration to strategic issues when making decisions on trade with the U.S.S.R. 
As a result, we have agreed not to engage in trade arrangements which contribute to the military or strategic advantage of the U.S.S.R. or serve to preferentially aid the heavily militarized Soviet economy. In putting these principles into practice, we will give priority attention to trade in high technology products, including those used in oil and gas production. We will also undertake an urgent study of Western energy alternatives, as well as the question of dependence on energy imports from the Soviet Union. 
In addition, we've agreed on the following immediate actions. First, each partner has affirmed that no new contracts for the purchase of Soviet natural gas will be signed or approved during the course of our study of alternative Western sources of energy. Second, we and our partners will strengthen existing controls on the transfer of strategic items to the Soviet Union. Third, we will establish without delay procedures for monitoring financial relations with the Soviet Union and will work to harmonize our export credit policies. 
The understanding we and our partners have reached and the actions we are taking reflect our mutual determination to overcome differences and strengthen our cohesion. I believe this new agreement is a victory for all the allies. It puts in place a much needed policy in the economic area to complement our. policies in the security area. 
As I mentioned a moment ago, the United States imposed sanctions against the Soviet Union in order to demonstrate that their policies of oppression would entail substantial costs. Well, now that we've achieved an agreement with our allies which provides for stronger and more effective measures, there is no further need for these sanctions, and I am lifting them today. 
The process of restoring a proper balance in relations with the Soviet Union is not ended. It will take time to make up for the losses incurred in past years. But acting together, we and our allies are making major progress. And I'm happy to say the prospects for peace are brighter. 
I have just returned to the White House from the Soviet Embassy, where I signed the book of condolence for President Brezhnev. New leaders are coming to power in the Soviet Union. If they act in a responsible fashion, they will meet a ready and positive response in the West.


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on East-West Trade Relations and the Soviet Pipeline Sanctions 
November 13, 1982

The President. No. As a matter of fact, this was talked of—doing it today—if we got the agreement. 
The President. Well, to the extent that the alliance is probably in a better union and more united than it's ever been, yes. It's sure to add to that as well as other hopes. 
The President. Oh, no. Yes, they did. 
The President. Let me just say that the agreement that we've reached is what we set out to get, and only turned to the sanctions when we were unable to get it. We had two different delegations in Europe over a year ago, and I tried again at the Versailles summit. But we have all come together on this, and it is so much more effective. The sanctions have served their purpose. 
The President. Well, I hope the signal will be that we're ready for a better relationship any time that they are. 

Remarks at the Annual Convention of the United States League of Savings Associations in New Orleans, Louisiana 
November 16, 1982
During the next 5 years our planned defense increase will come to less than 2 percent of the gross national product, or $70 billion at the 1982 level of gross national product. As a matter of fact, defense spending as a share of gross national product will be below the level that it was in 1960, which was before our Vietnam buildup and, more importantly, before the unprecedented Soviet buildup. Defense spending is 30 percent or less of our total budget. It used to run regularly around half of the Federal budget


Address to the Nation on Strategic Arms Reduction and Nuclear Deterrence 
November 22, 1982
As the Soviets power grew, we still managed to maintain the peace. The United States had established a system of alliances, with NATO as the centerpiece. In addition, we grew even more respected as a world leader with a strong economy and deeply held moral values. 
With ourcommitment to help shape a better world, the United States also pursued, and always pursued, every diplomatic channel for peace. And for at least 30 years after World War II, the United States still continued to possess a large military advantage over the Soviet Union. Our strength deterred—that is, prevented—aggression against us. 
And let me say I believe that if we follow prudent policies, the risk of nuclear conflict will be reduced. Certainly, the United States will never use its forces except in response to attack. Through the years, Soviet leaders have also expressed a sober view of nuclear war. And if we maintain a strong deterrent, they are exceedingly unlikely to launch an attack. 
Now, while the policy of deterrence has stood the test of time, the things we must do in order to maintain deterrence have changed. You often hear that the United States and the Soviet Union are in an arms race. Well, the truth is that while the Soviet Union has raced, we have not. As you can see from this blue U.S. line, 1 in constant dollars, our defense spending in the 1960's went up because of Vietnam. And then it went downward through much of the 1970's. And now follow the red line, which is Soviet spending. It's gone up and up and up. In spite of a stagnating Soviet economy, Soviet leaders invest 12 to 14 percent of their country's gross national product in military spending—two to three times the level we invest. 
The combination of the Soviets spending more and the United States spending proportionately less changed the military balance and weakened our deterrent. Today, in virtually every measure of military power, the Soviet Union enjoys a decided advantage. 
This chart shows the changes in the total number of intercontinental missiles and bombers. You will see that in 1962 and in 1972, the United States Forces remained about the same—even dropping some by 1982. But take a look now at the Soviet side. In 1962, at the time of the Cuban missile crisis, the Soviets could not compare with us in terms of strength. In 1972, when we signed the SALT I treaty, we were nearly equal. But in 1982—well, that red Soviet bar stretching above the blue American bar tells the story. 
I could show you chart after chart where there's a great deal of red and a much lesser amount of U.S. blue. For example, the Soviet Union has deployed a third more land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles than we have. Believe it or not, we froze our number in 1965 and have deployed no additional missiles since then. 
The Soviet Union put to sea 60 new ballistic missile submarines in the last 15 years. Until last year, we hadn't commissioned one in that same period.
The Soviet Union has built over 200 modern backfire bombers and is building 30 more a year. For 20 years, the United States has deployed no new strategic bombers. Many of our B-52 bombers are now older than the pilots who fly them. 
The Soviet Union now has 600 of the missiles considered most threatening by both sides—the intermediate-range missiles based on land. We have none. The United States withdrew its intermediate-range land-based missiles from Europe almost 20 years ago. 
The world has also witnessed unprecedented growth in the area of Soviet conventional forces. The Soviets far exceed us in the number of tanks, artillery pieces, aircraft, and ships they produce every year. What is more, when I arrived in this office, I learned that in our own forces we had planes that couldn't fly and ships that couldn't leave port mainly for lack of spare parts and crew members. 
The Soviet military buildup must not be ignored. We've recognized the problem and, together with our allies, we've begun to correct the imbalance. Look at this chart of projected real defense spending for the next several years. Here is the Soviet line. Let us assume the Soviets rate of spending remains at the level they've followed since the 1960's. The blue line is the United States. If my defense proposals are passed, it will still take 5 years before we come close to the Soviet level. Yet, the modernization of our strategic and conventional forces will assure that deterrence works and peace prevails. 
Some may question what modernizing our military has to do with peace. Well, as I explained earlier, a secure force keeps others from threatening us, and that keeps the peace. And just as important, it also increases the prospects of reaching significant arms reductions with the Soviets, and that's what we really want. 
The United States wants deep cuts in the world's arsenal of weapons, but unless we demonstrate the will to rebuild our strength and restore the military balance, the Soviets, since they're so far ahead, have little incentive to negotiate with us. Let me repeat that point because it goes to the heart of our policies. Unless we demonstrate the will to rebuild our strength, the Soviets have little incentive to negotiate. If we hadn't begun to modernize, the Soviet negotiators would know we had nothing to bargain with except talk. They would know we were bluffing without a good hand, because they know what cards we hold just as we know what's in their hand. 
You may recall that in 1969 the Soviets didn't want to negotiate a treaty banning antiballistic missiles. It was only after our Senate narrowly voted to fund an antiballistic missile program that the Soviets agreed to negotiate. We then reached an agreement. We also know that one-sided arms control doesn't work. We've tried time and time again to set an example by cutting our own forces in the hope that the Soviets would do likewise. The result has always been that they keep building.
I believe our strategy for peace will succeed. Never before has the United States proposed such a comprehensive program of nuclear arms control. Never in our history have we engaged in so many negotiations with the Soviets to reduce nuclear arms and to find a stable peace. What we are saying to them is this: We will modernize our military in order to keep the balance for peace, but wouldn't it be better if we both simply reduced our arsenals to a much lower level? 
Let me begin with the negotiations on the intermediate-range nuclear forces that are currently underway in Geneva. As I said earlier, the most threatening of these forces are the land-based missiles which the Soviet Union now has aimed at Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. 
This chart shows the number of warheads on these Soviet missiles. In 1972 there were 600. The United States was at zero. In 1977 there were 600. The United States was still at zero. Then the Soviets began deploying powerful new missiles with three warheads and a reach of thousands of miles—the SS20. Since then, the bar has gone through the roof—the Soviets have added a missile with three warheads every week. Still, you see no United States blue on the chart. Although the Soviet leaders earlier this year declared they'd frozen deployment of this dangerous missile, they have in fact continued deployment. 
Last year, on November 18th, I proposed the total, global elimination of all these missiles. I proposed that the United States would deploy no comparable missiles, which are scheduled for late 1983, if the Soviet Union would dismantle theirs. We would follow agreement on the land-based missiles with limits on other intermediate-range systems. 
The European governments strongly support our initiative. The Soviet Union has thus far shown little inclination to take this major step to zero levels. Yet I believe, and I'm hoping, that as the talks proceed and as we approach the scheduled placement of our new systems in Europe, the Soviet leaders will see the benefits of such a far-reaching agreement. 
This summer we also began negotiations on strategic arms reductions, the proposal we call START. Here we're talking about intercontinental missiles, the weapons with a longer range than the intermediate-range ones I was just discussing. We're negotiating on the basis of deep reductions. I proposed in May that we cut the number of warheads on these missiles to an equal number, roughly one-third below current levels. I also proposed that we cut the number of missiles themselves to an equal number, about half the current U.S. level. Our proposals would eliminate some 4,700 warheads and some 2,250 missiles. I think that would be quite a service to mankind. 
This chart shows the current level of United States ballistic missiles, both land and sea-based. This is the Soviet level. We intend to convince the Soviets it would be in their own best interest to reduce these missiles. Look at the reduced numbers both sides would have under our proposal—quite a dramatic change. We also seek to reduce the total destructive power of these missiles and other elements of United States and Soviet strategic forces. 
In 1977, when the last administration proposed more limited reductions, the Soviet Union refused even to discuss them. This time their reaction has been quite different. Their opening position is a serious one, and even though it doesn't meet our objective of deep reductions, there's no question we're heading in theright direction. One reason for this change is clear. The Soviet Union knows that we are now serious about our own strategic programs and that they must be prepared to negotiate in earnest. 
We also have other important arms control efforts underway. In the talks in Vienna on mutual and balanced force reductions, we've proposed cuts in military personnel to a far lower and equal level. And in the 40-nation Committee on Disarmament in Geneva, we're working to develop effective limitations on nuclear testing and chemical weapons. The whole world remains outraged by the Soviets and their allies use of biological and chemical weapons against defenseless people in Afghanistan, Cambodia, and Laos. This experience makes ironclad verification all the more essential for arms control. 
There is, of course, much more that needs to be done. In an age when intercontinental missiles can span half the globe in less than half an hour, it's crucial that Soviet and American leaders have a clear understanding of each other's capabilities and intentions. 
Last June in Berlin, and again at the United Nations Special Session on Disarmament, I vowed that the United States would make every effort to reduce the risks of accident and misunderstanding and thus to strengthen mutual confidence between the United States and the Soviet Union. Since then, we've been actively studying detailed measures to implement this Berlin initiative. 
Today I would like to announce some of the measures which I've proposed in a special letter just sent to the Soviet leadership and which I've instructed our Ambassadors in Geneva to discuss with their Soviet counterparts. They include, but also go beyond, some of the suggestions I made in Berlin. 
The first of these measures involves advance notification of all United States and Soviet test launches of intercontinental ballistic missiles. We will also seek Soviet agreement on notification of all sea-launched ballistic missiles as well as intermediate-range land-based ballistic missiles of the type we're currently negotiating. This would remove surprise and uncertainty at the sudden appearance of such missiles on the warning screens of the two countries. 
In another area of potential misunderstanding, we propose to the Soviets that we provide each other with advance notification of our major military exercises. Here again, our objective is to reduce the surprise and uncertainty surrounding otherwise sudden moves by either side. 
These sorts of measures are designed to deal with the immediate issues of miscalculation in time of crisis. But there are deeper, longer term problems as well. In order to clear away some of the mutual ignorance and suspicion between our two countries, I will propose that we both engage in a broad-ranging exchange of basic data about our nuclear forces. I am instructing our Ambassadors at the negotiations on both strategic and intermediate forces to seek Soviet agreement on an expanded exchange of information. The more one side knows about what the other side is doing, the less room there is for surprise and miscalculation. 
Probably everyone has heard of the so-called Hot line, which enables me to communicate directly with the Soviet leadership in the event of a crisis. The existing Hot line is dependable and rapid, with both ground and satellite links. But because it's so important, I've also directed that we carefully examine any possible improvements to the existing Hot line system. 

Remarks to Reporters on Action by the House Appropriations Committee Supporting Production of the MX Missile 
December 2, 1982

This program is essential to the ability of the United States to maintain a credible deterrent on land, in the air, and on the sea. Moving forward on schedule will also greatly increase the prospects for a meaningful strategic arms reduction agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union.


Remarks at the Signing of the United States-Costa Rica Extradition Treaty in San Jose 
December 4, 1982

I hope he'll forgive me, but a refugee from the Soviet Union told me of a story that was widespread among the people of Moscow. And what they told each other in a line of humor was that if an opposition party should be allowed in the Soviet Union, they would still be a one-party country, because everyone would join the opposition. 


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on the President's Trip to Latin America 
December 4, 1982

The President. Well, you know, the idea that has been kind of indicated is that we didn't have any communications. We've been in constant communication with the Soviet Union, and, yes, we haven't had time to deal with that. But I understand that his reply has come, expressing an interest in those things that 


Remarks at a Dinner Honoring the Republican Majority in the Senate 
December 9, 1982

Now, I won't take this opportunity at a social gathering like this to twist your arms— [laughter] —much. [Laughter] I'll just tell you, now that we can look each other in the eye, the MX system is needed. If we expect the Soviet Union to take our arms control proposal seriously, we mustact seriously with the choices that we make


Remarks on Signing the Human Rights and Day of Prayer for Poland Proclamations 
December 10, 1982

I have before me, as I'm sure you know, two documents that speak to freedom, and especially to Polish freedom. And their contents, particularly at this time—because Monday marks the first anniversary of the repression of Polish freedom by the military government there. And this repression, carried out under intense Soviet pressure and using tactics of brute force and intimidation, has sparked anger and sadness throughout the world.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Production of the MX Missile 
December 10, 1982

I also think it's fair to mention a couple of headlines that I came across earlier this week after the House voted. One said, "Soviets Voice Satisfaction on MX Rejection." The other read, "Soviets Cheer House for Rejecting MX Missile Appropriation." Well, if the Soviets are so pleased, perhaps we should be a little more concerned.

The President. There have been several rather well-documented articles that have appeared in print with regard to, let us say then, participation in the peace move by the Soviets. We know that the originator-the originating organization of that was the World Peace Council, which is a Soviet organization supported by and maintained by them. 
I can tell you that I have made inquiry on some of the articles that have appeared and asked for an analysis of whether they were factual or not, and the reports that I have received back, though, is that with here and there, an exception for journalistic exaggeration, they did check out. 
I say again that the millions of people who are supportive of that movement, I'm sure, are sincere and well-intentioned and from that standpoint that we share the same goals. I think that a freeze would be just fine if we can get down first to equality between the two countries. But in this country today, we have less megatonnage, less force in our ballistic missile system, land-based system, than we had 20 years ago. And the Soviets, in the meantime, are now producing their fifth generation of missiles. They have improved in accuracy. They have improved in MIRV'ing. They've improved in the megatonnage. And all I'm saying is that one must look to see whether, well-intentioned though it may be, this movement might be carrying water that they're not aware of for another purpose. 
Incidentally, the first man who proposed the nuclear freeze was in February 21st, 1981, in Moscow—Leonid Brezhnev
The President. Oh, well, the greatest way that we're going to save money on defense is getting the Soviet Union to join us in arms reduction. That will be a legitimate savings and greater. And this works against that. This is very obviously a detriment to our negotiators



Radio Address to the Nation on Production of the MX Missile 
December 11, 1982

There's no question about the need for modernizing them. Today all three are made up mainly of weapons we developed more than 10 years ago—more than 20 years ago in the case of our bombers. Sooner or later older systems become ineffective and vulnerable. Our most pressing problem today is that the Soviet Union, because of its massive buildup of nuclear weapons, could destroy virtually all of our land-based missiles in a single nuclear attack. If we do nothing to correct that situation, we will have weakened the chances for peace. This is why we need the new MX Peacekeeper missile—to help restore our strategic deterrent and literally to keep the peace. 
The basing mode is not an issue. There's plenty of time to decide on that. What we need now is a clear, positive vote on the missile itself, to go forward on production of the missile. Why? Because we're negotiating with the Soviet Union at Geneva to reduce substantially nuclear arsenals on both sides—the other key to protecting the peace in the nuclear age. These are tough negotiations, but our team is hanging in there. However, if we just cancel the Peacekeeper, the MX—if we say we won't deploy it—we remove a major incentive for the Soviets to stay at the table and agree to reductions. 
Look at it from their perspective. If we're willing to cancel a weapon system without getting something in return, why should they offer to eliminate or reduce weapons that give them an advantage over us? 
In 1977 my predecessor sent his Secretary of State to Moscow with a proposal that the Soviets reduce the number of their heavy SS-18 missiles. At the time, we had nothing comparable to the SS-18 and no new missiles to deploy. The result was what you'd expect. The Soviets refused to even consider the proposal. I can't believe the American people want to make that mistake a second time. The stakes are just too high. 
Without the Peacekeeper, we weaken our ability to deter war, and we may lose a valuable opportunity to achieve a treaty to reduce nuclear weapons on both sides. With it, we make progress on—both paths to peace. On both counts, there's no doubt that we need it. 
As we present our case for the Peacekeeper missile to you, I hope you'll keep in mind that by continuing to maintain our ability to deter attack, we make it less likely that the horror of nuclear war will ever occur. And by keeping our defenses credible, we offer the Soviet Union a realistic incentive to reduce tensions and to agree to significant and verifiable arms reductions. 
These are vital objectives. But I can't achieve them without the support of the American people and the United States Congress. To protect the peace, we must provide the funds necessary to offset the enormous Soviet military buildup and restore a military balance, particularly in nuclear weapons. And to achieve the arms reductions we want, we must give the Soviets the incentive to negotiate. We must go to the bargaining table in a position of strength, not weakness


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Production of the MX Missile 
December 14, 1982

The President. Yes, it can, because participating in our meetings has been General Rowney—is home. They're taking an interlude here in the arms negotiation talks. And he has spoken of the impact that this has had and the seriousness of the negotiations, that the Soviet Union is willing and is negotiating. 
And the thing is, this is not in the sense of a bargaining chip that somebody can say, "Well, you're building it just to tear it down." No. We need a modernization. Even if we get the reduction of arms which we're seeking and which there has been some indication that the Soviets are seriously considering, this would not be the missile that would be taken out of circulation. 
We need to modernize to catch up with the five generations of missiles that they have been developing while we have stayed static and have not improved in the last 15 years in any of our missiles. We do not match them in accuracy. We do not match them in megatonnage. This is a miss fie that is comparable to their big missiles, their SS18's. 
The President. Well, I think the very fact that they made a proposal to reduce in numbers reveals that they, too, are concerned. And they became concerned when NATO asked and we agreed to provide comparable intermediate-range missiles, of which there are none now in Europe, as a deterrent to their use of the SS-20's. And, so, the very fact that they have volunteered, it isn't adequate. And it would still leave us at a considerable disadvantage

Radio Address to the Nation on Economic Recovery and National Defense 
December 18, 1982

By providing adequate compensation for our soldiers, by giving them the tools they need to do their jobs, we're restoring dignity, honor, and pride to the uniform of the United States of America. And, by strengthening the credibility of our Armed Forces, we increase the probability of reaching a satisfactory arms control agreement with the Soviet Union. 
The United States will redouble its efforts to restore sovereignty to Lebanon and to renew negotiations for an end to turmoil and bloodshed in the Middle East. And we'll strive to strengthen world peace through intensive negotiations with the Soviet Union. I want the Russian people to know the United States is committed to negotiate significant reductions in existing levels of weapons and to foster a more stable relationship between our two nations.

Remarks in an Interview With Independent Radio Network Correspondents on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
December 18, 1982

The President. Well, I don't think I should express a personal belief on this now. I do think that since an investigation is going forward on this, I think it's a little delicate for a head of state to give an opinion one way or the other. 
The President. No, I just say I'm going to wait and see what the investigation brings


Remarks on the Caribbean Basin Initiative to the Ambassadors of Member Nations of the Organization of American States 
December 22, 1982

My conversations with the Presidents of five Caribbean Basin countries were particularly inspirational and helpful. We face common economic problems of deficits, slow growth, idle capacity, and high debts, and common threats of insurgencies supported by Cuba and other Soviet satellites


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on the Accomplishments of the 97th Congress 
December 23, 1982

The President. Well, I haven't thought about it much in that line, except that we can say that in this year, and even in the preceding year, the Soviet Union has not advanced further in its expansionism than it had 2 years ago. It has not gone into additional countries. I think we have made great progress with regard to our relationship with our allies in Europe and Japan, and more recently—although we began earlier-with our neighbors here in the Western Hemisphere. And I think that the initiative that we've taken in the Middle East is probably the greatest accomplishment, and I have great hopes for that. If we can bring peace to that very troubled area, I think we will have made a very great accomplishment



Christmas Day Radio Address to the Nation 
December 25, 1982

"For all of our problems, with the price of gas, and not being able to afford a new car or other creature comforts this year... I really don't see a lot of leaky boats heading out of San Diego looking for the Russian ships out there 



Remarks at the Recommissioning Ceremony for the U.S.S. New Jersey in Long Beach, California 
December 28, 1982

Another great power in the world sees its military forces in a different light. The Soviet Union has achieved sheer power status only by—r I should say superpower status only by virtue of its military might. It has done so by sacrificing and ignoring achievement in virtually any and every other field. 
Potential adversaries saw this unilateral disarmament, which was matched in all the other services, as a sign of weakness and a lack of will necessary to protect our way of life. While we talked of detente, the lessening of tensions in the world, the Soviet Union embarked on a massive program of militarization. Since around 1965, they have increased their military spending, nearly doubling it over the past 15 years.
But while we do this, we're advancing vigorous arms control proposals aimed at deep and verifiable reductions in strategic nuclear missiles. We have proposed that intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe be reduced to zero on both sides at the same time we cut conventional forces in Europe to balanced levels. And I may say, the news is encouraging. The Soviet Union has met us halfway on the zero option. They've agreed to zero on our part. [Laughter] 
We can't shut our eyes to the fact that, as the Soviet military power increased, so did their willingness to embark on military adventures. The scars are plainly evident in a number of Third World countries. We're also aware that, though the Soviet Union is historically a land power—virtually self-sufficient in mineral and energy resources and land-linked to Europe and the vast stretches of Asia—it has created a powerful, blue-oceans navy that cannot be justified by any legitimate defense need. It is a navy built for offensive action, to cut the Free World's supply lines and render impossible the support, by sea, of Free World allies



Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Arrival in Palm Springs, California 
December 29, 1982

The President. Well, I haven't heard that, but I know that, from our talking with them, they feel that the Soviets are really negotiating in good earnest. So, we're a little optimistic


The President's News Conference
January 5, 1983
The President. Well, this is something, I think, certainly to be considered if that's what he is proposing, is a nonaggression pact. But with regard to a summit, I am, in principle, in favor of that. I proposed meeting Mr. Brezhnev in New York at the time of the United Nations Disarmament Conference, believing that he would be there. And then, we know now, I'm sure, why he couldn't make that trip. And so we didn't. 
But I think that a summit is something that requires some planning. I don't think you just say, "Let's get together, sit around a table," and then say, "Well, what do we talk about?" I think you have to plan, and you have to know that and believe that you can accomplish something. And when we can be sure of that—no, I would welcome a summit just as I welcomed his suggestion about continuing the talks on reducing of arms. 
The President. I think this is something that has just happened, and this is something that would require consultation with all of our allies in NATO.
The President. I know that the Italians are investigating, and in view of their procedures and their handling of the General Dozier case, I have great confidence in their abilities. But as long as they're investigating, I don't think it would be proper for me to make a comment on this, because I would have no information except the same things that all of us know about this. 
The President. Well, I think that it certainly would have an effect. I think it would have an effect worldwide, and I'd meet that problem when we got to it. But until we do, I'll—well


Radio Address to the Nation on United States-Soviet Relations and the Vice President's Trip to Europe 
January 8, 1983

Today I'd like to share with you some thoughts on one of the most important aspects of America's role in the world—our relations with the Soviet Union. Keeping the peace for both countries—for that matter, for all mankind, depends on our wise and steady management of this relationship. 
As you know, a new leader has come to power in Moscow. There's been much speculation about whether this change could mean a chance to reduce tensions and solve some of the problems between us. No one hopes more than I do that the future will bring improvement in our relations with the Soviets and an era of genuine stability. What could be more important than reducing the danger of confrontation, increasing the prospects for enduring peace, lowering nuclear arsenals, relieving human suffering in Afghanistan, Kampuchea, and elsewhere? 
In this effort, we must learn from history. We all experienced the soaring hopes and then plunging disappointment of the 1970's, when the Soviet response to our unilateral restraint was to accelerate their military buildup, to foment violence in the developing world, to invade neighboring Afghanistan, and to support the repression of Poland. 
The lesson is inescapable. If there are to be better mutual relations, they must result from moderation in Soviet conduct, not just our own good intentions. In recent days, some encouraging words have come out of Moscow. Clearly the Soviets want to appear more responsive and reasonable. But moderate words are convincing only when they're matched by moderate behavior. 
Now we must see whether they're genuinely interested in reducing existing tensions. We and our democratic partners eagerly await any serious actions and proposals the Soviets may offer and stand ready to discuss with them serious proposals which can genuinely advance the cause of peace. 
We do not insist that the Soviet Union abandon its standing as a superpower or its legitimate national interests. In fact, we hope that the new leadership in Moscow will come to realize that Soviet interests would be improved by ending the bloodshed in Afghanistan, by showing restraint in the Middle East, by permitting reform and thus promoting stability in Poland, by ending their unequaled military buildup, as we have proposed, by reducing the most dangerous nuclear arms to much lower and equal levels. 
We stand ready to work towards solutions to all outstanding problems. Now, this doesn't mean that we should neglect our own defenses. That would undercut our ability to maintain peace and jeopardize whatever chance we may have for changing Soviet conduct. But it does mean that we're always ready to sit down with the Soviets to discuss practical steps that could resolve problems and lead to a more durable and genuine improvement in East-West relations. 
Next month, Soviet and American negotiators will resume talks in Geneva on strategic and intermediate-range nuclear forces. We've proposed drastic cuts in those threatening intermediate-range forces. The Soviets have responded in both negotiations with proposals of their own. So, a serious foundation for progress has been laid. America will negotiate energetically and in good faith to achieve early agreements providing for reduced and equal levels of forces. The Soviet leadership must understand that the way to reduce the nuclear threat is by negotiating in the same sincere spirit and not by trying to sow division between the American people and our NATO partners. That kind of negative tactic is certain to fail and can only delay real progress. 
A cornerstone of our approach to relations with the Soviet Union is close consultation with our allies on common political and security issues. In this spirit, I've asked Vice President Bush to travel to Europe. Beginning at the end of this month, he will visit the Federal Republic of Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, France, and Great Britain, and at the Vatican he will meet with Pope John Paul II. In Switzerland the Vice President will meet with the negotiating teams for the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks, which we call START, and the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces arms control talks we call INF and will attend a meeting of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. 
So, the new year begins with reason for all of us to hope that if we continue to act firmly and wisely, 1983 can be a time of peaceful progress for America, for our allies, for the people of the U.S.S.R., and for the entire world



Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the American Farm Bureau Federation in Dallas, Texas 
January 11, 1983

Agriculture came roaring into the 1980's pulsating with productive capacity and hopes for the future. But 2,000 years ago, the Roman poet Virgil said, "God didn't will that the way of cultivation should be easy." Well, old Virgil didn't know how right he was. Three years ago this month, the previous administration embargoed grain shipments to the Soviet Union. Our 75-percent share of the Soviet market plummeted to 30 percent. Other countries filled in the gap and then locked in new, long-term trade agreements with the Soviets. We not only lost sales, we lost our reputation as a reliable supplier. It takes years, not months, to regain that reputation. 
To rebuild our reputation as a reliable supplier, last March 22d I pledged an end to export interruptions except in extreme foreign policy circumstances. I've kept that pledge. As the Governor of another great agricultural State, Charles Thone of Nebraska, said to me last summer, there must be no question about our respect for contracts. We must restore confidence in the United States reliability as a supplier. An agreement would also protect Americans from possible Soviet disruption of our domestic market


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on the Second Anniversary of the Inauguration of the President 
January 20, 1983

We've reached a bipartisan compromise to save the social security system, and our efforts to strengthen our security and build a more peaceful world through arms reduction negotiations with the Soviet Union and through helping the peace process in the Middle East and other world troublespots are in full swing

In the last 2 years, I think many observers think that you've been in a push-pull situation—one day as in London, talking about a crusade for freedom, the next day as in Bonn, talking about accommodation with the Soviet Union. And just this morning, the Soviets are saying that they will break off the arms negotiations if we go ahead with our missile deployment in Europe. Where do we stand there with the Soviets? 
The President. Sam [Sam Donaldson, ABC News], let me jog your memories a bit. In that first press conference across the street, the question that was asked of me was with regard to my personal trust in the Soviet Union, did I trust and believe in the Soviet Union. And I did not render as an opinion of mine the things that I said about them. My reply, if you want to go back and look it up, was that this is what they said of themselves, that they reserve these rights to break a promise, to change their ways, to be dishonest, and so forth, if it furthered the cause of socialism. 
Now, just the other day, one among you somewhere has written and commented on that and has quoted the 10 commandments of Nikolai Lenin that he printed as the 10 principles, guiding principles of communism. And they're all there, that promises are like pie crust, made to be broken. And he went right on down the line, that the Soviet Union considered the—and I used this, I quoted this 2 years ago—he said that the Soviet Union believed that the only morality was that which furthered the cause of world socialism, that they recognize no immorality. 
The President. I thought there was something in there about trust. 
The President. We're going to continue, because we believe that the Soviet Union has some problems of their own that have to be resolved. And in these negotiations that are going on, we think that it would be in their interest as well as ours. That's why we are so hopeful and optimistic that something can be gained here, that they cannot go on down the road they're going in a perpetual arms race. And so this is one of the things in connection with our own arms race. It gives us a leverage that has brought them to the table in the first place. 
Now, we know that the thing they don't want, above all, is the placement of a deterrent to their SS-20 missiles in Europe. And we claim that to continue to stand there, with them having enough warheads to literally wipe out every population center in Western Europe, with no deterrent on our side—and the NATO allies recognize this, and we have said at their request that we will provide a deterrent. But we have said it would make a lot more sense if we simply, rather than two sides facing each other there with these missiles poised at each other, if we simply went to a zero option. 
Now, they've agreed halfway with that. They want us to remain at zero, and they're willing to trim a few of their warheads if we will.
The President. No, no. At the negotiating table, they've got to make proposals which we can then counter, and we keep on negotiating. This is a little bit like haggling over the price. 
The President. But, now, this is why the most important part in arms negotiations, from our side, must be verifiable. We must both agree to theright of each side to verify that the other is doing what it said. 
The President. Lesley, the trouble is if I answer that, then I'm getting into what I said I wouldn't talk about the other day. You can't talk openly about strategy or tactics. We have said—and we stick to it—we have said that we believe the best solution for both of us is zero-zero, both sides. But we have said we will listen to and negotiate any fair proposals that are made. 
The President. Yes. The answer to that is not propaganda; it's public relations. There is no question their goal is that whatever they do, they do not want us to implement the plan of placing even one of those missiles in European soil. And we are just as determined that we are going to stay on schedule with that. 
And when I say it's public relations on our part, it requires us to remind those people that are hearing this propaganda, both here and in Europe, that what the Soviet Union is demanding is theright to maintain enough intermediate-range nuclear warheads to literally, as I say, hit every population center in Europe, but they don't want a single weapon of a deterrent nature to be there on the other side. And when the people realize that, I think the people living in those population centers are going to have something to say.
The President. We have only heard that as a rumor. We have no report that that is an official demand of their negotiating



Remarks to the Reagan Administration Executive Forum 
January 20, 1983

The quality of recruits, their training, and our overall readiness are all being upgraded. We're restoring dignity, honor, and pride to the uniform of the United States. And, by strengthening our Armed Forces, we increase our ability to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union that will not just limit strategic weapons but actually reduce them



Question-and-Answer Session With High School Students on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
January 21, 1983

The President. Yes, self-determination is a viable option for the eighties. The El Salvador situation has been distorted by a worldwide propaganda campaign, and I believe this stems from the Soviet Union by way of Cuba. It is a foothold they're attempting to establish here in the Western Hemisphere, on the mainland of North-South-Central America, of a Communist state, similar to Cuba. 
Now, I believe that all of the Americas have a stake in seeing that we do notallow that kind of a bridgehead to be established here. And on my recent trip to Latin America, I found great support for the fact that we must keep Cuba from being, as it is, the puppet of the Soviet Union and establishing that bridgehead here in our country

No, what we're doing with our present buildup of military is overcoming several years in which we virtually, unilaterally disarmed. We let our arms go. We canceled things like the B-1 bomber and so forth while the Soviet Union has been engaged in the biggest military buildup in the history of man. They outnumber us in virtually every kind of weapon. And, as I say, the prime responsibility of government is the security of the people. 
Now, we have three teams negotiating for disarmament with the Soviet Union in Geneva, Switzerland—one trying to get rid of the intermediate-range nuclear missiles that are based in Europe on the NATO line and targeted in on all the urban centers and everything of Europe. And there's nothing to counter that. That is one set of negotiations
The second one is for all the strategic weapons, the great missiles that they've got aimed at us, as we have missiles aimed at them. They outnumber us, and they've got bigger and newer ones than we have, but we want those reduced. And we've proposed to them a great reduction. 
And then, in conventional weapons, because they have built up the biggest blueocean navy in the world, where once we thought we had such a thing, and we don't. We have gone from a thousand ships back down to around 400. And we're not going back up to a thousand, but we're going to have to strengthen that Navy. 
But the reason is, back of it all, if we ever hope to get disarmament, we will only get it by indicating to them that if they're going to keep on with that buildup, they're going to have to be able to match us, because we're going to build up. 
There was a cartoon that explained it all. Brezhnev, before he died, was supposed to be talking to a Russian general. And he said to the general, "I liked the arms race better when we were the only ones in it."
I think it's been pretty successful. The major parties, of course, had it and have nuclear power, nuclear weapons. The two great threats are, of course, the United States and the Soviet Union. But I think that we're pretty well on our way to, if not entirely eliminating nuclear proliferation, holding it down to where a country might have a weapon or two, but they're not going to have enough to threaten the world






