MID 222502, US v USSR, 2 jul to 1-Aug-79 to 20-Nov-79



Bardstown, Kentucky Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
July 31, 1979

Since I've been in office, we have substantially strengthened our own Nation's military commitment to our Allies in NATO, in Western Europe. We've got new friends that were formerly intimate allies with the Soviet Union. Egypt is a typical example. You can look at the whole coast of Asia now, from South Korea all the way down around to India; in almost every instance, we have a stronger allegiance and a closer friendship with them than we had 2 years ago, 5 years ago, or 10 years ago

It would not help us to violate ourcommitment to Panama, to have the Soviet Union and Cuba come in and try to change that government into a Communist government. Since we ratified the Panama Canal treaties, the Panamanians have had a free election; they have chosen 500-and-something members of their Congress. The Congress members have chosen a brand new President, and Panama is on the road now toward a true democracy

The Soviets are tough negotiators, but so are we. And there is no doubt in my mind that no matter what level of defense spending we have, whether it's exactly right, $5 billion too low, $5 billion too high, we need the SALT II agreement, the treaty ratified. But what I'm going to do as President is work with the United States Senate and the Congress to have the SALT II agreement, which will give us peace; cut down on the nuclear arms race; let us monitor what the Soviets are doing, control the proliferation of nuclear weapons throughout all the rest of the world; stop the Soviets' buildup, which has been faster than ours in the past—all that will come with SALT II. And in addition to that, have a strong defense to make sure our Nation is always as strong as or stronger than the Soviet Union no matter what happens




Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
August 10, 1979

The other thing I'd like to say is that we have an international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation study that we initiated in the economic summit conference in London in 1977. Its report will be completed this year. It's been a report evolved by the representatives of more than 50 nations, including the Soviet Union, South Africa, all of the Western allies and so forth. And I would guess that when this report is completed that it would be at the forefront of our agenda when we have our economic summit conference next year in Venice


Tampa, Florida Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
August 30, 1979

We've now got a SALT agreement with the Soviets to put a very tight constraint over any increase in nuclear weapons that threaten the world; and the Soviet Union, if the SALT treaty is passed, will have to cut back their nuclear arsenal, their numbers of launchers by 10 percent. We won't have to cut back any. But this will lead to further progress in the future, and to constrain nuclear weapons is a very burning issue now before the United States Senate


Tampa, Florida Question-and-Answer Session With Florida Newspaper Editors. 
August 30, 1979

There's a great stabilizing interrelationship between ourselves and the Saudi Arabians. They see us as their ultimate, not quite protective, but stabilizing factor, and they don't want to sever their relationships with us. They have an abhorrence of the Soviet Union because it's atheistic and because it's Communist and because they encourage, sometimes, radicalism and turmoil and violence. And they know that we are a religious nation, and they know we are a democratic nation; we know our attitude toward them is benevolent, and they know our basic policy is one of espousing stability. And all those factors, and others that I could name, are attractive to the Saudi Arabians

THE PRESIDENT. I don't know. If you studied the reservations which Senator Biden and others described, they consist primarily of the inclusion in the SALT treaty itself of agreements that have already been negotiated very carefully and accepted by both sides, plus an agreement that the Senate is certainly likely to request, that the protocol which is designed to last a limited period of time will not have any presumption of extension. Do you follow me? So, those are the kinds of things that have already been negotiated very carefully with the Soviet Union. 
Some of them are not in the text of the treaty, and if the Senate should—I am not advocating this, but if the Senate should say in the ratification agreement, "We approve SALT II provided it is understood that the protocol will not be extended and that the production rate of Backfire bombers will not exceed 2 1/2 per month," which is 30 per year and so forth, then I think that the Soviets might accept it. But I can't speak for them. They were not willing during the negotiating phase to include those things in the document, in the treaty document itself. But they have agreed to those understandings, equally binding them. 
THE PRESIDENT. We have the agreement from them, and if I discovered, for instance, through various means—aerial surveillance and other means that the Soviets were producing four Backfire bombers per month, I would consider that an adequate cause for abrogation of the treaty itself, because it would be a violation of the solemn commitment of the nations and its leaders. 
I consider those ancillary agreements to be just as binding as the agreements within the text of the treaty. And Brezhnev does, too. You cannot imagine—I bet you we spent more time on the verbal agreement concerning the Backfire bomber than we did at any other single issue that is included within the SALT treaty. And it was at the last minute in Vienna when Brezhnev finally acknowledged that the limit was 30 Backfire bombers per year. They had not been willing to do that up until then, because Brezhnev himself had taken the position at Vladivostok, negotiating with President Ford, that the Backfire bombers were not a legitimate subject for negotiations, since it was not a strategic arms. It was a very sensitive thing to them. And we really had to go to the wall to get them to agree that they were producing at a rate of 30 and they would not exceed it.

(Note – I am missing some initial non-answers about Soviet troops in Cuba because the reporters refer to them as Russian.  If Carter had answered substantively, he would have almost certainly called them Soviet, but he evades the questions.  The presence or absence of these evasive answers will not affect the scoring.)

World Conference on Religion and Peace Remarks at a White House Reception for Conference Participants. 
September 6, 1979

Anyone here from India? Very fine. Canada? The Federal Republic of Germany? People's Republic of China? China. Very good. The Soviet Union? And 40 other nations, I understand


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With a Group of Editors. 
September 7, 1979

It is a coincidence that we have already had a major announcement on the deployment of the MX missile in a mobile form this morning, and in just a few minutes, about 4 o'clock, I will make a statement to the Nation concerning the Soviet troops in Cuba.1 
I've talked to Dr. Brzezinski since he met with you and have read a transcript of his answers and your questions concerning those troops
THE PRESIDENT. I'm convinced that SALT II ought to be passed on its own merits. I'm convinced that SALT II contributes to the security of our country, and I'm convinced that SALT II enhances the prospect for world peace. I'm convinced that the rejection of SALT II would cause each one of the inevitable, competitive interrelationships between ourselves and the Soviets in the future to be magnified in their importance and become a much more critical problem than would that same incident with SALT II. 
There's no way that we can avoid peaceful competition with the Soviets as we deal with countries in Africa or Asia or the Mideast or Eastern or Western Europe. And without a SALT agreement limiting strategic nuclear weapons, each one of those differences, which are going to be with us for many, many years, is much more likely to become a major threat to our Nation's peace. 
So, SALT II is so beneficial on its own merits—I think the Senate has accepted the basic proposition that it is adequately verifiable—to link it with some action or inaction of the Soviets, or for them to link it with some action or inaction of ours, I think, would not be in the best interest of the American people
As you know, it was difficult, almost impossible, to get two-thirds of the Members of the Senate to become convinced, on its own merits, that the Panama Canal [Treaty] 2 was in the best interests of our country, in spite of the fact that the overwhelming portion of our own constituents at home did not favor the Panama Canal Treaty. I think in the SALT case, a substantial majority of the American people basically approve the signing of a treaty between ourselves and the Soviets to limit nuclear arms

THE PRESIDENT. When I assess in my own mind the trends in Soviet influence the last 10 or 15 years, say—just to get out of my own administration and to make it a bipartisan thing—versus the Soviet Union, I'm very encouraged. 
The Soviets did win an advantage in Afghanistan. That Soviet-endorsed government is in substantial danger, and that's significant. But when you compare that with our new relationship with India, compared to what it was 5 years ago, or our new relationship with Egypt, the strongest and most powerful Arab country, compared to what it was during the time of the Aswan Dam construction, when Egypt was absolutely committed to the Soviet Union and was dependent on the Soviet Union for military and economic aid, and now are completely friends with us and have prohibited Soviet technicians and others from coming into the country—that's a major change in the Mideast itself. 
The People's Republic of China, a fourth of the people on Earth—it wasn't long ago that they were endorsed and supported by and were the closest of allies with the Soviet Union. Now we have a new and burgeoning friendship with the people of the People's Republic of China, and we have not lost our financial and economic and friendly relationships with the people on Taiwan
So, I think that if you look at other factors—our espousing human rights, the economic strength of our country, our overall trade relationships in almost every measure, I do not see our country as being affected detrimentally, as contrasted with the Soviet Union. 
We recognize that they are a military nation; they put a lot more emphasis on military weaponry than do we. And we are much more inclined to support the status quo, to put down regional conflagrations and conflicts than are the Soviet Union. They espouse a revolutionary political thesis, and to them the change of governments quite often is in their advantage. We generally are inclined to support the government that's in power, unless it is so obnoxious to our own standards and principles that we cannotaccept it. 
So, the Soviets are inclined to stir up trouble; we're inclined to try to dampen trouble and to provide peace. That's one thing that gives them an advantage when there is trouble. But I think we have stood up well against them, and I think we can continue to do it in the future on a peaceful, competitive basis. There's no doubt in my mind that the ideals and the principles and the basic strengths of America can prevail and have prevailed
THE PRESIDENT. I agree with your assessment that Andy has greatly enhanced our relationships. And one of the advantages that we've got over the Soviet Union in the less-developed world is because of Andy Young



MX Missile System Remarks Announcing the Configuration for Basing the Missile System. 
September 7, 1979

Finally, this system is compatible with existing SALT agreements and with our objectives for SALT III. Deploying this system will make it clear to the Soviet Union that they will gain no strategic advantage out of continuing the nuclear arms race. This is a fundamental precondition to more effective arms control agreements. Equally important, this system points in the direction of reductions of strategic arms, because we are giving better protection with a force of fewer missiles. Without such a mobile shelter system, the only way we could maintain our deterrent would be to increase greatly the number of our strategic systems or nuclear missiles.


Soviet Combat Troops in Cuba Remarks to Reporters
September 7, 1979

I want to take a few minutes to speak to you about the presence of the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba. The facts relating to this issue have been carefully laid out by Secretary Vance, both in his public statement and in his testimony before the Congress. The facts, in brief, are as follows: 
We have concluded, as the consequences of intensified intelligence efforts, that a Soviet combat unit is currently stationed in Cuba. We have some evidence to indicate that such a unit has been in Cuba fox- some time, perhaps for quite a few years. 
The brigade consists of 2,000 to 3,000 troops. It's equipped with conventional weapons, such as about 40 tanks and some field artillery pieces, and has conducted training as an organized unit. 
It is not an assault force. It does not have airlift or sea-going capabilities and does not have weapons capable of attacking the United States. 
The purpose of this combat unit is not yet clear. However, the Secretary of State spoke for me and for our Nation on Wednesday when he said that we consider the presence of a Soviet combat brigade in Cuba to be a very serious matter and that this status quo is notacceptable. 
We are confident about our ability to defend our country or any of our friends from external aggression. The issue posed is of a different nature. It involves the stationing of Soviet combat troops here in the Western Hemisphere, in a country which acts as a Soviet proxy in military adventures in other areas of the world, like Africa. 
We do have theright to insist that the Soviet Union respect our interests and our concerns if the Soviet Union expects us to respect their sensibilities and their concerns. Otherwise, relations between our two countries will inevitably be adversely affected. We are seriously pursuing this issue with the Soviet Union, and we are consulting closely with the Congress. 
Let me emphasize that this is a sensitive issue that faces our Nation, all of us, and our Nation as a whole must respond not only with firmness and strength but also with calm and a sense of proportion. 
This is a time for firm diplomacy, not panic and not exaggeration. As Secretary Vance discusses this issue with Soviet representatives in the coming days, the Congress and the American people can help to ensure a successful outcome of these discussions and negotiations by preserving an atmosphere in which our diplomacy can work. 
I know I speak for the leadership in Congress, with whom I have met this afternoon, as well as for my own administration, when I express my confidence that our Nation can continue to show itself to be calm and steady, as well as strong and firm




Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters. 
September 21, 1979

The House and the Senate have many other items to consider—the Senate, obviously, involving itself with consideration of SALT. The Cuban-Russian troop item has been a matter of extra concern for us the last 2 or 3 weeks, and the size of the defense budget is being negotiated with the Senators. This is just a range of subjects that we have in legislation

There's a fairly good crop of grain in China and some other areas of the world. There's a fairly short crop of grain in the Soviet Union. And of course, we will have a bumper crop of grain this year. So, we have really emphasized this ability

THE PRESIDENT. We have successfully, I think, concluded a negotiation with the Soviets on the prohibition against radiological weapons—that is, using radioactivity. We've not yet been successful in working out an agreement with the Soviet Union to abolish chemical warfare weapons, but we are actively pursuing that. 
I don't believe it would be good for our country unilaterally to take this action. If we did, there would be no possible means in the future to induce the Soviets to join in with us and remove the threat of chemical warfare from the world. The major unresolved difficulty is how to verify compliance with such an agreement. 
THE PRESIDENT. We would look very good to some people in the world if we unilaterally disarmed and prostrated ourselves and said to the Soviets, "Come in and walk over us." But I don't feel that that's an appropriate position for me as President to assume
Secretary Vanee made a statement, which I later followed and basically repeated, that, I think, goes as far as I want to go as far as a President. I said this was a matter of great concern to us, that the status quo was notacceptable, and that we would be working with the Soviet Union to change the situation in a manner that would be acceptable to us. If this effort should be unsuccessful, then I would have to take appropriate action. And I think to go into further detail than that would be inappropriate. 
We are meeting with the Soviet Union, assessing our intelligence data, understanding clearly what is the status quo, and I'll have to make a judgment on what to do about it within the near future.


New York City, New York Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting With Residents of the Borough of Queens. 
September 25, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. First of all, let me say that this is not the same thing as the 1962 missile crisis. At that time, the Soviets had within Cuba missiles, that could reach our own Nation, that had nuclear warheads. There was a direct threat to our country, and millions of people could have been killed from those launching pads. Our country was threatened with an offensive attack. 
The present brigade of Soviet troops in Cuba is not a threat to the security of our country. There are about 2,500 troops there. They do have 40 tanks and a few field pieces; they have no offensive weapons that can reach our shores. They have no capability for a seaborne invasion; they have no capability for an airborne invasion. So, it's not a threat to our security. 
The thing that concerns us, however-and this is a serious matter, and the status quo is notacceptable to us—is that it's a combat unit. The Soviets deny it has combat status. But it is a combat unit located in a country in this hemisphere, in a country that is totally dependent on the Soviet Union. 
Cuba, in effect, is a puppet of the Soviet Union, and they act completely in accordance with Soviet foreign policy. A hundred percent of all their weapons are given to them by the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union gives Cuba about $8 million every day to sustain it economically. They pay five times the world price, for instance, for all Cuba's sugar. They provide them with all their oil. And in response to that or in trade for that, Cuba acts, in effect, as a Soviet surrogate in many nations around the world. 
In 1975, as you know, they moved thousands of troops into Angola. Since I've been President, they've moved thousands of troops into Ethiopia. They have troops in many other countries in Africa. So, because of the combination of Soviet support and Cuba acting as a Soviet puppet, this does create a great concern for us. There is, however, no threat to our Nation's security. 
We are now trying, through diplomacy, to get the Soviets to eliminate the combat nature of this unit, and I don't know yet whether we will succeed. If we do not succeed, we will take appropriate action to change the status quo
THE PRESIDENT. I would rather not spell out at this point what we will do. 
There are two ways to change the status quo. One is by the action of the Soviet Union. If the Soviets fail to act, then the other way to change the status quo is by action on the part of the United States. And I will report to the Nation, probably within the next week, after we get through with our negotiations with the Soviet Union, what action I will take. But it would not be appropriate tonight for me to give you the details of what we might do.
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, they ought to be separated. There ought not to be any connection. 
THE PRESIDENT. You put me in the position of defending the Soviet Union, which I have no inclination to do. [Laughter] But let me say this: There have been troops in Cuba for a long time. 
THE PRESIDENT. In 1962 there were 22,000 troops in Cuba. Evidence is that ever since that time, there have been substantial numbers of Soviet troops in Cuba. 
We, this year, began to monitor that situation much more closely. In the past Cuba was not a high priority for us to monitor with our surveillance systems on a concentrated basis. We were looking at the Soviet Union to make sure they complied with the provisions of SALT I; we were monitoring Vietnam during that war, and we, this year, earlier, focused our attention more on Cuba to monitor what the Soviet troops were doing. My judgment is that the number of Soviet troops is less now than it was in 1963, for instance, months after all the missiles had been moved out of Cuba in October, I believe, of 1962. 
The question is whether this is a combat unit—we're convinced it is—and whether that combat status should change. I might point out to you that the United States :has troops in several countries around the world, some of them very close to the borders of the Soviet Union. This is part of a normal interrelationship between major powers, like ours, and the Soviet Union. We have troops in South Korea, we have troops in Japan, we have a few troops in Turkey, we have had some troops in Iran, and so forth. And so, this is not a new thing. 
But we want the Soviets to understand that the American people are exceptionally sensitive about Soviet combat troops in this hemisphere, particularly in a country like Cuba, which acts, in effect, as an arm of the Soviets in adventurism and intervention in other countries. 
How to deal with this successfully is not an easy task, but we'll do the best we can. And I believe that you will be satisfied when I make my report to the country within the next week.


Democratic National Committee Remarks at a Fundraising Dinner. 
September 26, 1979

I could have written a better SALT treaty had I done it unilaterally, without consulting the Soviet Union. This treaty was hammered out over 7 years by three Presidents. It's fair; it's balanced. It contributes to our Nation's security. It lets us monitor what the Soviets are doing. It puts a limit and an actual decrease of 10 percent on Soviet missile launchers. It keeps us in a role of leadership for the Western World. It holds NATO together. It contributes to world peace. It gives us authenticity and influence in preventing non-nuclear weapons from turning toward that horrible option


President's Commission on the Holocaust Remarks on Receiving the Final Report of the Commission. 
September 27, 1979

Your very work as a commission is part of a living memorial to the victims of the Holocaust. Your grappling with the meaning of this event has helped bring new understanding and moral vision to all who must confront this question. Your historic trips to the concentration camps in Eastern Europe and to Babi Yar in the Soviet Union have helped to arouse the conscience of the world and to remind us once again that we must never forget. And I know our country appreciates the fact that many of you went on those trips, not at Government expense, but at your own expense


Peace and National Security Address to the Nation on Soviet Combat Troops in Cuba and the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty. 
October 1, 1979

This evening, I also want to report to you about the highly publicized Soviet brigade in Cuba and about its bearing on the important relationship between our Nation and the Soviet Union. 
This is not a simple or easy subject. The United States and the Soviet Union are the two most powerful nations on Earth, and the relationship between us is complex, because it involves strong elements of both competition and cooperation. 
Our fundamental philosophies conflict; quite often, our national interests conflict as well. As two great nations, we do have common interests, and we share an overwhelming mutual concern in preventing a nuclear war. We must recognize 'therefore that nuclear arms control agreements are vital to both our countries and that we must also exercise self-restraint in our relations and be sensitive to each other's concerns. 
Recently, we obtained evidence that a Soviet combat brigade has been in Cuba for several years. The presence of Soviet combat troops in Cuba is of serious concern to us. 
I want to reassure you at the outset that we do not face any immediate, concrete threat that could escalate into war or a major confrontation—but we do face a challenge. It is a challenge to our wisdom, a challenge to our ability to act in a firm, decisive way without destroying the basis for cooperation that helps to maintain world peace and control nuclear weapons. It's a challenge to our determination to give a measured and effective response to Soviet competition and to Cuban military activities around the world. 
Now let me explain the specific problem of the Soviet brigade and describe the more general problem of Soviet-Cuban military activism in the Third World. 
Here is the background on Soviet forces in Cuba: As most of you know, 17 years ago in the era of the cold war, the Soviet Union suddenly attempted to introduce offensive nuclear missiles and bombers into Cuba. This direct threat to the United States ended with the Soviet agreement to withdraw those nuclear weapons and a commitment not to introduce offensive weapons into Cuba thereafter. 
At the time of that 1962 missile crisis, there were more than 20,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba. Most of them were withdrawn, and we monitored their departure. It was believed that those who stayed behind were not combat forces, but were there to advise and train Cubans and to perform intelligence functions. 
Just recently, American intelligence obtained persuasive evidence that some of these Soviet forces had been organized into a combat unit. When attention was then focused on a careful review of past intelligence data, it was possible for our experts to conclude that this unit had existed for several years, probably since the mid-1970's, and possibly even longer. 
This unit appears to be a 'brigade of two or three thousand men. It is armed with about 40 tanks and other modem military equipment. It's been organized as a combat unit. Its training exercises have been those of a combat unit. 
This is not a large force, nor an assault force. It presents no direct threat to us. It has no airborne or seaborne capability. In contrast to the 1962 crisis, no nuclear threat to the United States is involved. 
Nevertheless, this Soviet brigade in Cuba is a serious matter. It contributes to tension in the Caribbean and the Central American region. The delivery of modern arms to Cuba and the presence of Soviet naval forces in Cuban waters have strengthened the Soviet-Cuban military relationship. They've added to the fears of some countries that they may come under Soviet or Cuban pressure. 
During the last few years, the Soviets have been increasing the delivery of military supplies to Cuba. The result is that Cuba now has one of the largest, best equipped armed forces in this region. These military forces are used to intrude into other countries in Africa and the Middle East. 
There's a special relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union. The Cubans get their weapons free; other Soviet satellite countries have to pay for their military supplies. The Communist regime in Cuba is an economic failure that cannot sustain itself. The Soviet Union must send to Cuba about $8 million in economic aid every day. 
Fidel Castro does not pay money for Soviet arms; the Cuban people pay a much higher price. In every international dispute, on every international issue, the Cuban regime automatically follows the Soviet line. The Soviet brigade is a manifestation of Moscow's dominance of Cuba. It raises the level of that dominance, and it raises the level of responsibility that the Soviet Union must take for escalating Cuban military actions abroad. 
Now I want to report further on what we are doing to resolve these problems and to counter these activities. 
Over the past 3 weeks, we've discussed this issue at great length with top Soviet officials. We've made it clear that the presence of a Soviet combat unit in Cuba is a matter of serious concern to us. 
The Soviet Union does not admit that the unit in question is a combat unit. However, the Soviets have made certain statements to us with respect to our concern: that the unit in question is a training center, that it does nothing more than training and can do nothing more; that they will not change its function or status as a training center. We understand this to mean that they do not intend to enlarge the unit or to give it additional capabilities. 
They have said that the Soviet personnel in Cuba are not and will not be a threat to the United States or to any other nation; that they reaffirm the 1962 understanding and the mutually agreed upon confirmation in 1970 and will abide by it in the future. We, for our part, reconfirm this understanding. 
These assurances have been given to me from the highest level of the Soviet Government. 
Although we have persuasive evidence that the unit has been a combat brigade, the Soviet statements about the future noncombat status of the unit are significant. However, we shall not rest on these Soviet statements alone. 
First, we will monitor the status of the Soviet forces by increased surveillance of Cuba. 
Second, we will assure that no Soviet unit in Cuba can be used as a combat force to threaten the security of the United States or any other nation in this hemisphere. Those nations can, be confident that the United States will act in response to a request for assistance to meet any such threat from Soviet or Cuban forces. 
This policy is consistent with our responsibilities as a member of the Organization of American States and a party to the Rio Treaty. It's a reaffirmation in new circumstances of John F. Kennedy's declaration in 1963 "that we would notpermit any troops from Cuba to move off the island of Cuba in an offensive action against any neighboring countries." 
Third, I'm establishing a permanent, full-time Caribbean joint task force headquarters at Key West, Florida. I will assign to this headquarters forces from all the military services responsible for expanded planning and for conducting exercises. This headquarters unit will employ designated forces for action if required. This will substantially improve our capability to monitor and to respond rapidly to any attempted military encroachment in this region. 
Fourth, we will expand military maneuvers in the region. We will conduct these exercises regularly from now on. In accordance with existing treaty fights, the United States will, of course, keep our forces in Guantanamo. 
Fifth, we will increase our economic assistance to alleviate the unmet economic and human needs in the Caribbean region and further to ensure the ability of troubled peoples to resist social turmoil and possible Communist domination. 
The United States has a worldwide interest in peace and stability. Accordingly, I have directed the Secretary of Defense to further enhance the capacity of our rapid deployment forces to protect our own interests and to act in response to requests for help from our allies and friends. We must be able to move our ground, sea, and air units to distant areas, rapidly and with adequate supplies. 
We have reinforced our naval presence in the Indian Ocean. 
We are enhancing our intelligence capability in order to monitor Soviet and Cuban military activities—both in Cuba and throughout the world. We will increase our efforts to guard against damage to our crucial intelligence sources and our methods of collection, without impairing civil and constitutional rights. 
These steps reflect my determination to preserve peace, to strengthen our alliances, and to defend the interests of the United States. In, developing them, I've consulted not only with my own advisers but with congressional leaders and with a bipartisan group of distinguished American citizens as well. The decisions are my own, and I take full responsibility for them as President and as Commander in Chief. 
I have concluded that the brigade issue is certainly no reason for a return to the cold war. A confrontation might be emotionally satisfying for a few days or weeks for some people, but it would be destructive to the national interest and to the security of the United States. 
We must continue the basic policy that the United States has followed for 20 years, under six administrations of both parties, a policy that recognizes that we are in competition with the Soviet Union in some fields and that we seek cooperation in others—notably maintaining the peace and controlling nuclear arms. 
My fellow Americans, the greatest danger to American security tonight is certainly not the two or three thousand Soviet troops in Cuba. The greatest danger to all the nations of the world—including the United States and the Soviet Union—is the breakdown of a common effort to preserve the peace and the ultimate threat of a nuclear war. I renew my call to the Senate of the United States to ratify the SALT II treaty. 
SALT II is a solid treaty. Ensuring compliance with its terms will not be a matter of trust. We have highly sophisticated, national technical means carefully focused on the Soviet Union to ensure that the treaty is verifiable. 
This treaty is the most important step ever taken to control strategic nuclear arms. It permits us to strengthen our defense and to preserve the strategic balance at lower risk and lower cost. During the past few years, we have made real increases in our defense expenditures to fulfill the goals of our 5-year defense plan. With SALT II, we can concentrate these increases in areas where our interests are most threatened and where direct military challenge is most likely. 
The rejection of SALT would seriously compromise our Nation's peace and security. 
Of course we have disagreements with the Soviets. Of course we have conflicts with them. If we did not have these disagreements and conflicts, we would not need a treaty to reduce the possibility of nuclear war between us. 
If SALT II is rejected, these disagreements and conflicts could take on a new and ominous dimension. Against the background of an uncontrolled nuclear arms race, every confrontation or dispute would carry the seeds of a nuclear confrontation. 
In addition, SALT II is crucial to American leadership and to the further strengthening of the Western Alliance. Obviously, a secure Europe is vital to our own security. The leaders of our European Allies support SALT II—unanimously. We've talked to a number of those leaders in the last few days. I must tell you tonight that if the Senate fails to approve the SALT treaty, these leaders and their countries would be confused and deeply alarmed. If our allies should lose confidence in our ability to negotiate successfully for the control of nuclear weapons, then our effort to build a stronger and more united NATO could fail. 
I know that for Members of Congress this is a troubling and a difficult issue, in a troubling and difficult time. But the Senate has a tradition of being the greatest deliberative body in the world, and the whole world is watching the Senate today. I'm confident that all Senators will perform their high responsibilities as the national interest requires. 
Politics and nuclear arsenals do not mix. We must not play politics with the security of the United States. We must not play politics with the survival of the human race. We must not play politics with SALT II. It is much too important for that—too vital to our country, to our allies, and to the cause of peace. 
The purpose of the SALT II treaty and the purpose of my actions in dealing with Soviet and Cuban military relationship are exactly the same—to keep our Nation secure and to maintain a world at peace. 
As a powerful nation, as a super power, we have special responsibilities to maintain stability even when there are serious disagreements among nations. We've had fundamental differences with the Soviet Union since 1917. I have no illusions about these differences. The best way to deal with them successfully is to maintain American unity, American will, and American strength. That is what I am determined to do. 


The President's News Conference
October 9, 1979
In my opinion, we have answered the question of the Soviet combat unit in Cuba adequately. I think we've isolated any threat from that unit. We'll increase our surveillance there, and I believe that this obviously has been an important issue for us to address. I believe it's been addressed adequately

THE PRESIDENT. The troops in Cuba have been there for a long time. I've not read Secretary Kissinger's speech; I've read news reports of it. Its basic premises are compatible with my own: that the presence of a Soviet combat unit there is a serious matter, which I think we have addressed as best we could; secondly, that this is not the most important matter of all, that above and beyond that, it's important to recognize and to do what we can to contain Cuban interventionism or adventurism around the world. As you know, this began primarily with the entrance of more than a 10,000 body of troops from Cuba into Angola in 1975, before I was President. 
We do look upon this as a major threat. I have not seen any reports that Secretary Kissinger recommended different moves from the ones that I outlined to the Nation on the evening of October 1. So, we do share a common concern. I think that our response was measured and appropriate. I do not favor the Soviets extending their arm of influence to the Cubans or anyone else around the world. 
This has been part of the history of the Soviet Union. We attempt to meet them and compete with them adequately, in my opinion, on a peaceful basis. And in my judgment, if we can control the military expenditures and have equality, have arms control, in my judgment, we can compete with the Soviets on a peaceful basis with an excellent prospect for victory. 
The Soviets represent a totalitarian nation; we arecommitted to peace and freedom and democracy. The Soviets subjugate therights of an individual human being to therights of the state; we do just the opposite. The Soviets are an atheistic nation; we have deep and fundamental religious beliefs. The Soviets have a primary emphasis on the military aspect of their economy; ours is much more broadly based to give the benefits of economic growth to individual human beings. So, I believe that in addition to that, our raising a standard of human rights and the honoring of national aspirations, not trying to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries, gives us an additional advantage in a peaceful competition with the Soviets. 
So, I don't have any fear of or any: trepidation about that intense competition with the Soviets on a peaceful basis. I obviously want the same thing that President Brezhnev wants, that is, the avoidance of a nuclear war. So, we have some things in common, the avoidance of war. We have other things in common, a willingness to compete. 
We've got advantages over them that I hope to utilize in the future as we have in the past
THE PRESIDENT. Our allies and we are carefully assessing the significance of President Brezhnev's statement. However, I'd like to point out that what he's offering in effect is to continue their own rate of modernization as it has been, provided we don't modernize at all. 
They have had an actual reduction in launchers the last few years. They've been replacing the old SS-4's and SS-5's with the SS-20, not on a one-for-one basis, but the SS-20 has three warheads, the old missiles only had one warhead. The SS-20 has a much greater range. It can reach our Western Allies' countries as a target even if it's located in the central part of Russia. It's three to six times as accurate as the old missiles which it replaced. And in addition to that, it's mobile; that is, it can't be located specifically and destroyed with a preemptive strike if that should become a desire on the part of allies. They also have replaced older airplanes with the Backfire bomber. 
So, it's not quite as constructive a proposal as at first blush it seems to be. I think it's an effort designed to disarm the willingness or eagerness of our allies adequately to defend themselves. 
So, if we can be successful in controlling existing strategic Soviet and United States atomic weapons through SALT II, then we'll move in the next step to reducing the nuclear weapons which don't have intercontinental range. And along with that, we'll continue with our mutual and balanced force reduction effort to reduce conventional arms. 
It's an interesting proposal; it's one that might show promise. We're assessing it carefully, but it's not as great a step as would ordinarily be judged at first.


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters. 
October 10, 1979

Militarily, I'm determined to keep our Nation as strong as any on Earth. I don't ever want to see our country be second to the Soviet Union or any other country in military strength


San Diego, California Remarks at the Annual Convention of the Building and Construction Trades Department, AFL-CIO. 
October 11, 1979

SALT II represents 7 years of detailed negotiations under three different Presidents, both parties. It's a fair treaty; it's a balanced treaty. It's a treaty that can be verified; it's a treaty that lets us monitor what the Soviets are doing. It's a treaty that maintains our role as a leader of the Western World. It's a treaty that exemplifies America's desire for peace through strength. It's a treaty which permits our Nation to put its precious financial resources where they pay the greatest dividend for American quality of life. It's a treaty that enhances world peace. This is a responsibility that we must fulfill for our own children and for future generations. 
SALT II will lead to further arms reductions so that we can maintain equivalency of military strength and use the tremendous advantages that America has to compete with the Soviet Union all over the world. 
We are a nation that believes in freedom, individuality, liberty, democracy; the Soviets don't believe in those things. We think a person should never be subjugated to the state; the Soviets put the state first. We are a nation with deep ethical standards and religious beliefs; the Soviets are an atheistic nation. We believe in therights of other countries; the Soviets inject themselves directly or through Cuban surrogates into the internal affairs of other countries and disrupt the societies there


San Diego, California Remarks at a Reception Hosted by the San Diego County Board of Supervisors. 
October 11, 1979

This treaty has been negotiated by three Presidents over a period of 7 years. If SALT II should be rejected, the consequences would be a severe blow to our country. We would have no way to monitor what the Soviets are doing. They could do everything they wanted to secretly, and every time we got a rumor of a new weapon for the Soviet Union or a new breakthrough for the Soviet Union or additional weapons for the Soviet Union, we would have to suspect the worst. It would create an enormous nuclear arms race, exactly the opposite of what we want, and the balance between ourselves and the Soviet Union would not be changed. It would just greatly escalate both of us in the percentage of our resources spent on nuclear weapons. We don't need that. 
And also our allies in Europe look upon us as being responsible for containing and reducing the nuclear threat to them. And if the Soviets have accepted the treaty, which they have, and then the United States rejects it, it would be a clear signal to our own allies that we cannot be trusted anymore to represent the Western World in controlling these terribly devastating weapons


"Ask the President" Remarks During a Telephone Call-out Program on National Public Radio
October 13, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. There's a limit to what I can do. We have inquired into the Wallenberg case with the Russians, both when I was in Vienna this year with President Brezhnev and other Russian leaders, and through the Soviet Ambassador here in Washington and also our Ambassador in Moscow. On occasions, when Secretary Vance has met with Foreign Minister Gromyko, we've also inquired about the Wallenberg case, along with the cases of many others. 
The Soviets maintain their claim that Mr. Wallenberg is no longer alive, but we are not forgetting about this case and will continue our efforts
THE PRESIDENT. Jerry, if the SALT II treaty is rejected, this would be a severe blow to our country, to our Nation's security, and to the prospects for world peace. SALT II is a treaty that's been negotiated over a 7-year period by three different Presidents—two Republicans and myself as a Democrat. It's a carefully negotiated treaty that is in the best interest of our own country and also, I might add, in the best interest of the Soviet Union and all those who want peace on Earth. 
We have adequate means to verify compliance with the SALT II treaty. We do not depend on trusting the Soviet Union. We have our own national technical means that we can use to make sure that the Soviets do honor every provision in the SALT II treaty. If we should detect in the future—and we have that ability-any evidence that the Soviets are violating the treaty, then we have theright under the terms of the treaty itself to terminate the treaty at that moment. 
Another thing that I'd like to point out to you are the consequences of rejection. It would end, really, a 30-year process toward controlling nuclear weapons throughout the world, particularly in our country and the Soviet Union. If that was ended, it would be very difficult to recommence it, and if we did start another 2- or 3- or 7-year negotiation, the chances are very high that the final product would be almost identical to what we have negotiated this time. 
In addition, a lot of countries around the world—our allies, like those in Europe, Japan, the less developed countries, nonaligned nations like India, for instance-look upon us and the Soviet Union as having a major responsibility to negotiate successfully. We have negotiated successfully. The Soviets have, in effect, adopted the treaty, because they don't have democratic processes, but we still have to get the approval of the Senate. 
If the Senate should vote no on SALT, this would be a clear signal to the people all over Earth that our country is not indeed committed to the control of nuclear weapons adequately, and the Soviets would be given a tremendous and undeserved propaganda weapon to use against us. They would say, falsely, that they are a nation committed to peace and the control of nuclear weapons, but that we, because the Senate rejected SALT II, are a nation that's not inclined toward peace and the control of nuclear weapons. That would be a false claim, but it would be a very powerful political weapon that the Soviets could use. 
What I want to do is to maintain equivalency and equality of nuclear capability, reduce sharply in the future atomic weaponry, and then compete with the Soviet Union on a peaceful basis, because we've got all the advantages on our side—democracy, freedom, respect for human rights, basic ethical standards, deep religious commitments. On a peaceful basis, we can compete and win. We don't want to compete on a warlike basis, but we're going to stay strong enough to deter any potential aggressor from daring to attack us. SALT II would accomplish all these worthy goals
We spend now a very small portion of our gross national product on defense, about 5 percent. Other countries like the Soviet Union spend often much more. The Soviet Union spends maybe 13 to 15 percent of their GNP on defense. For the last 15 or 20 years, they have increased their defense expenditures by about 3 or 4 percent per year in real terms, like compound interest. We spend now less than we did 15 or 20 years ago, in real dollars, on defense. We've tried to make up that difference and to retain our strength by more efficient expenditure of funds and to tap the basic strengths of our country in politics and economics and otherwise. 
We are moving toward a possibility of drastically reducing nuclear weapons in the future if we can get SALT II ratified. Both President Brezhnev and I, I think the people of America and the people of the Soviet Union want to see drastic cuts made in nuclear armaments below what they are now, even below what they will be under SALT II
THE PRESIDENT. I don't believe that that's an accurate comparison. I believe that the space shuttle will be a major innovation. In effect, now, the Soviets are just following along with what we've done many years ago

Just yesterday, for instance, I welcomed here the new Ambassador from Uganda, who has spent a lot of time in our country when Idi Amin, supported by the Soviet Union, was violating human rights in the grossest and most obnoxious way. Now the new government is much more inclined toward honoring human rights

There's no doubt in my mind that the SALT II treaty will enhance our relative military strength with the Soviet Union. For instance, the Soviets will be required to dismantle or destroy about 10 percent of all the nuclear missile launchers that they have. We will not be required to dismantle any of them. And this will mean that over a period of time, we'll maintain equivalency with the Soviet Union in strategic or nuclear armaments and, at the same time, have a chance to take our great reservoir of financial and natural resources and our human resources and orient them either toward conventional defense capability or toward a better life for our people. 
If we can maintain military strength adequate to defend our country and that's what I'm committed to do—then we put the competition with the Soviet Union on a peaceful basis where, in my opinion, we have all the advantages. 
For instance, the Soviet Union is a totalitarian government; ours is a free government, a democratic government. The Soviets believe that the citizen ought to be subject to the mandates of the state; we believe that citizens as individuals ought to be honored and that the citizens ourselves should control the government. We believe in individual initiative and in the worth of the human beings; the Soviets believe that the state should dominate in every respect. Ours is a country that's founded on a free enterprise system, where innovation and new ideas, through a competitive society, have a chance to succeed, and it inspires the rapid development of research and development. 
I think if you'd look at the Nobel prizes given out in health or chemistry or physics and so forth in the past number of years, America takes a tremendous number of those because this is an advantage that we have. 
One of the most important advantages, however, is that we have moral and ethical standards, human rights standards that make us competitively superior over the Soviet Union in the peaceful competition for the friendship, the hearts and the minds, the trade relationships of uncommitted or nonaligned people around the world. 
We value also the independence of other governments, even in small or weak or new nations. The Soviets often try to subvert those governments and take over control of the affairs of people. 
So, in a peaceful competition with the Soviet Union, I think we have all the advantages to prevail. That is an important element of the SALT treaties. 
On the China question—if you look at the last number of years, we have made tremendous strides, in my opinion, in this peaceful competition for the friendship of those around the world. It wasn't too long ago that the closest ally that the Soviets had was the People's Republic of China, a fourth of the population of the entire Earth. That's changed dramatically now. 
It wasn't too long ago that, under Mrs. Indira Gandhi, India was closely allied with the Soviet Union and quite antagonistic toward us. That has been completely changed. 
It wasn't too long ago that Egypt, the largest and most influential and important Arab country, was closely aligned with the Soviet Union and diametrically opposite and opposed to us. That's changed. 
We haven't been successful in every instance. But in general, in our peaceful competition with the Soviet Union, we are making out very well. And I think this gives us an opportunity—with China and other countries—to benefit Americans in the future


Dolton, Illinois Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
October 16, 1979

We are not at war with Cuba. We have no intention of being antagonistic toward the people of Cuba. The fact is that Cuba's policies, within their own nation and relating to other countries, make them a very difficult government to recognize officially. Also, they are almost completely subservient to the Soviet Government. They're kind of a surrogate of the Soviets. The Cubans have over 45,000 troops in countries overseas where, in my opinion, they have absolutely no business. It's the most highly militarized country on Earth per capita. 
The last point is this: There's no way that Cuba could survive economically, with their Communist experiment 90 miles from our country, without the Soviets propping them up. Every day the Soviet Union sends to Castro $8 million just to keep the Cuban people alive economically and to keep Castro in power. And they send them large quantities of arms, military weapons—and don't even charge Cuba for it. All the other satellite countries in Eastern Europe, for instance, when they get arms from the Soviet Union, they have to pay for it. 
We only spend about 5 percent of our gross national product on defense. In the past, this is the lowest we've ever spent. In the past, we've spent 8, 9, 10, 11 percent. The Soviet Union spends 13 percent of their gross national product on defense. Our military is still better than theirs, and we're going to keep it that way. But I hope that every American will realize that it's not a sacrifice when we pay our military personnel a good salary, when we give them high training, when we give them the best weapons



Boston, Massachusetts Question-and-Answer Session With Newspaper and Television Reporters. 
October 20, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. Well, first of all, let me say that the military strength of the United States is the greatest of any nation on Earth. And there have been some trends upward by the Soviet Union which have concerned 'me and have also concerned my predecessors in office and are beginning to concern the Congress as well

I might say that the percentage of our gross national product, what this country produces, that goes into military is very low, about 5 percent, much lower than it's been in previous years—we're more efficient now—and much lower than the Soviet Union puts in. They put in about 13 percent of their gross national product into defense, but still we're the strongest and we're going to stay that way

In addition to that, among the world of nations, we are reaching out. We've won new friends in the last few years that we never thought we'd get 15 or 20 years ago. Egypt, India, the People's Republic of China, Nigeria have moved toward us and away from the Soviet Union. So, we've been successful there


Equal Rights Amendment Remarks at a White House Reception for Supporters of the Amendment. 
October 23, 1979

This is a human rights issue. As I've told many of you before, some of you before, the first conversation I had with the Ambassador from the Soviet Union, just a get-acquainted session which lasted about an hour, we had a good exchange of ideas and views. And finally we began to talk about basic human rights, because I had made such an issue of the human rights issue itself in my Inaugural address and in my campaign. And his response, which took me aback somewhat, "You don't even have equal rights for women in the United States." Ambassador Dobrynin told me that. It's not the only time he's ever mentioned it. [Laughter] And I believe that this is, to a major degree, an indictment of our country


International Human Rights Award Remarks on Accepting the Award from the Synagogue Council of America
October 24, 1979

We've espoused the cause of human rights in trying to honor the desire of people to be free, to leave the Soviet Union, to escape persecution, to reunite families, to be able to speak without fear of restraint or punishment


Friends of Carter/Mondale Remarks at a Fundraising Dinner. 
October 24, 1979

And I want to make another thing clear. I'm a Navy man, come from Georgia, and I am for a strong defense. My position is clear, and I don't want to make any apology for it. And there may be those who say, "I wish you weren't so strongly for a powerful nation, militarily." I'm just going to take one aside to comment on why. We only spend about 5 percent of our gross national product for defense. In the past we spent much more than that. We do it more efficiently now, more effectively, better coordinated, better spirit. The Soviets spend 13 percent, 14, maybe 15 percent of their gross national product on defense


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters From Minnesota. 
October 26, 1979

We want to get along well with the Soviet Union and meet with them on a peaceful, competitive basis. We are proceeding with SALT, which I think is the most important decision that's likely to be made by our Government while I serve in this office. We've strengthened NATO. 
I think we've moved very firmly and aggressively to encourage new friendships around the world. India now has very good relationships with us. Under Mrs. Ghandi, they were inclined strongly toward the Soviet Union. Our new opening with China, a fourth of the nations' populations, has been very successful so far. We've not damaged our relationship, so far as anyone can tell, with the people of Taiwan. And this is a fine balancing act, which I think has been fairly successful at this point. We've also had a chance to open up the possibilities for increased benefits with relations among the African nations and ourselves



