MID 277501, US v Libya, 31 oct to 30-Nov-88 to 4-Jan-89



Remarks at a Republican Campaign Rally in Fullerton, California 
November 1, 1988

The President. Okay. Do you want our foreign policy in the hands of those who criticized our rescue mission in Grenada and our strike on Libya and who always, always blame America first


Remarks at a Republican Campaign Rally in San Bernardino, California 
November 1, 1988

Just listen to what they said no to. They opposed the liberation of Grenada. They opposed the blow we struck against terrorist Libya


Remarks at a Campaign Rally for Senator Chic Hecht in Reno, Nevada 
November 1, 1988

The fact is, if the liberals had had their way, there would have been no INF treaty or rollback in Afghanistan or democratic triumphs around the globe. They opposed rebuilding our military defenses. They opposed the deployment of the missiles in Europe to counter the Soviet threat. They opposed the liberation of Grenada. They opposed the raid on terrorist Libya. They oppose our policy of helping freedom fighters fight communism and advance the cause of liberty around the world. But Chic has advanced our cause every step of the way, and that's one of the reasons I can tell you today that in the past 8 years we haven't lost I square inch of ground to communism and, in fact, have returned one small country, Grenada, to freedom


Remarks at a Republican Campaign Rally in Palos Hills, Illinois 
November 4, 1988

Now, just listen to what the liberals have said no to. They opposed the liberation of Grenada. They opposed the blow we struck against terrorist Libya. They oppose our policy of helping freedom fighters advance the cause of liberty around the world. Well, George Bush and I did all these things, and I'll tell you proudly right now: We'd both do every single one of them over again


Remarks at a Republican Campaign Rally in Mount Clements, Michigan 
November 5, 1988

They opposed the liberation of Grenada. They opposed the blow we struck against terrorist Libya. They oppose our policy of helping freedom fighters advance the cause of liberty around the world. George Bush and I did all these things, and I'll tell you proudly right now: We'd both do every single one of them over again


Remarks at a Republican Campaign Rally in Mesquite, Texas 
November 5, 1988

No, they opposed the liberation of Grenada. They opposed the raid on terrorist Libya. They oppose our policy of helping freedom fighters fight communism and advance the cause of liberty around the world. There is a sign behind you on that. George and I did all those things, and I'll tell you proudly right now: We'd both do every single one of them over again


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville 
December 16, 1988

Serious problems, fundamental differences remain. Our system is one of checks and balances. Theirs, for all its reforms, remains a one-party authoritarian system that institutionalizes the concentration of power. Our foreign relations embrace this expanding world of democracy that I've described. Theirs can be known by the company they keep: Cuba, Nicaragua, Ethiopia, Libya, Vietnam, North Korea. Yes, we welcome Mr. Gorbachev's recent announcement of a troop reduction, but let us remember that the Soviet preponderance in military power in Europe remains, an asymmetry that offends our Jeffersonian senses and endangers our future

The President. Well, I think that the next administration—if I'm correct in your question there—yes, will continue the policy. We adopted a policy of complete resistance to terrorism: no recognition of a country that supported it—and there were countries that did. And I think an example, the shortest example that I can give you, was when we had the irrefutable proof that Qadhafi of Libya had been responsible for terrorism that took the lives of a number of people at an airport in Europe, including some Americans-we responded. 
And I'm going to knock on wood—just one more line on that. Since that response, there has been no Libyan terrorist move against any—

Excerpts From an Interview With David Brinkley of ABC News 
December 21, 1988

The President. Oh, I could live without ever seeing Qadhafi. 
The President. Yes, we're reasonably sure of that. 
The President. Well, let me say that's a decision that has not been made yet. We're in communication with our allies and with NATO forces and all, and we're watching very closely that situation. But even if I had made a decision, I couldn't 
The President. No. 
The President. We are discussing with them. And we want to pin down completely so that there is no question but that that's what it is: a plant that he is building, and one of tremendous size. 

The President. Yes. 



