MID 235301, US v Nicaragua, 2 dec 1985 to 2-Jan-86 to 31-Mar-88



Question-and-Answer Session With Students at Fallston High School in Fallston, Maryland 
December 4, 1985

Wars can start accidentally. Wars can spread across borders—regional wars, such as the one in Nicaragua. And this is why this was one of our subjects also for negotiation. We want to help in any way we can to persuade the Soviet Union to withdraw its troops, that they've had there fighting for 6 years, and bring them home and then let the people of Afghanistan, within their country, settle peacefully what kind of a government they want. The present government of Afghanistan was installed there by the Soviet Union, so that's why they're in, defending that government


Remarks on Signing the Bill of Rights Day and the Human Rights Day and Week Proclamation 
December 10, 1985

In the Western Hemisphere, where so much progress toward democracy has been made, Cuba stands out as the country where institutionalized totalitarianism has consistently violated the rights of the citizens. Unfortunately, the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua seems determined to embark on the same course. 
On three continents we see brave men and women risking their lives in anti-Communist battles for freedom. We cannot and will not turn our backs on them. This year the House of Representatives has heeded their call and voted aid to the freedom fighters in Cambodia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua and repealed a ban on aid to freedom fighters in Angola. Elsewhere we have seen considerable progress toward observance of human rights. In El Salvador, Grenada, and Honduras, freely selected—or elected governments, I should say, represent the best hope of their peoples for the future. And just over the last weekend, a new civilian president was elected in Guatemala-that's the first time in 15 years. We laud those achievements, but our concern remains for those who are still captive and oppressed. This is where our voices must speak for justice, for the force of world opinion can and does make a difference



Radio Address to the Nation on Tax Reform and the Situation in Nicaragua 
December 14, 1985

Now, I must address recent disturbing events in a country close to our borders-the Communist dictatorship in Nicaragua. Nicaragua today is an imprisoned nation. It is a nation condemned to unrelenting cruelty by a clique of very cruel men—by a dictator in designer glasses and his comrades, drunk with power and all its brutal applications. They stripped the Nicaraguan people of their rights by a state decree last October 15th, yet that decree only made official, and by their reckoning permissible, the theft of liberty that took place years ago. 
No institution more deeply embodies or glorifies or seeks to perfect the moral and spiritual goodness of man than the church in all of its denominations. Yet in Nicaragua, the church is the enemy. Protestant ministers and lay people have been arrested, interrogated, and tormented at secret police headquarters; some forced to stand naked in very cold rooms for long periods. A tiny population of Jews was bullied and driven out. Cardinal Obando y Bravo, a great hero of truth and courage, is prevented from speaking freely to his flock. The state police have expelled foreign priests and drafted seminarians, who are virtual prisoners in the Sandinistas' armed forces. And the Catholic Church's newspaper has been seized and Radio Catolica censored, sometimes shut down entirely. The same dictators who insulted Pope John Paul II also stopped Radio Catolica from broadcasting a letter from the Pope and this beatitude: "Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven." The truth is, these men are nothing but thugs, a gang of hard-core Communists to whom the word of God is a declaration of liberation that must be stamped out. 
Their denial of rights, their trampling of human dignity, their wrecking of an economy with suffocating socialist controls—all hurt and deeply offend us. But there's a cause for deeper concern: the specter of Nicaragua transformed into an international aggressor nation, a base for subversion and terror. Some 3,000 Cuban military personnel now lead and advise the Nicaraguan forces down to the smallest combat units. The Cubans fly the Soviet assault helicopters that gun down Nicaraguan freedom fighters. Over 7,000 Cubans, Soviets, East Germans, Bulgarians, Libyans, PLO, and other bloc and terror groups are turning Managua into a breeding ground for subversion. A delegation of Nicaraguans is now in Iran. Nicaragua's border violations against Honduras and Costa Rica continue. And Nicaragua's connection with the recent terrorist attack against Colombia's Supreme Court is now clear. 
What are we to do about such aggressions? What are we to do about Cuba's willful disregard of the 1962 Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding of which President Kennedy said, "... if Cuba is not used for the export of aggressive Communist purposes, there will be peace in the Caribbean."? Well, the answer is: more than we're doing now. If Nicaragua can get material support from Communist states and terrorist regimes and prop up a hated Communist dictatorship, should not the forces fighting for liberation, now numbering over 20,000, be entitled to more effective help in their struggle for freedom? Yes, and to reinforce this message, I sent my new national security adviser, John Poindexter, this week to visit the Central American democracies and make clear ourcommitment to a democratic outcome in Nicaragua. Those who struggle for freedom look to America. If we fail them in their hour of need, we fail ourselves as the last, best hope of liberty



Radio Address to the Nation on the Major Legislative Achievements of 1985 
December 21, 1985

The final legislative achievement I want to mention concerns foreign affairs. It involves the emergence in the Congress of a new mood, a new point of view. During this past year, the Congress repudiated isolationism and weakness and reasserted America's legitimate world role on behalf of human freedom. Indeed, in July, Congress voted aid to freedom fighters in Cambodia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua and repealed a ban on aid to the freedom fighters in Angola. This effort marked the appearance of a sober-minded realism, a new willingness to see clearly and to confront the dread effects of Communist expansion upon innocent peoples like those of Afghanistan and Nicaragua. And it's especially significant that aid to freedom fighters was also approved by the Democrat-controlled House. I'm convinced that a new, bipartisan foreign policy consensus is emerging, one based upon realism and which unites Democrats and Republicans alike in support of a strong national defense and help for freedom fighters around the globe



Radio Address to the Nation on Relations With Mexico and Canada 
January 4, 1986

In the international field, President De la Madrid and I expressed our respective viewpoints, notably on the problems of Nicaragua and other countries in Central America. President De la Madrid stressed that the conflicts in Central America have, in many cases, arisen from social and economic injustices. Well, for my part, I agreed that the nations of Central America have for many years been beset by poverty. And I pointed out that the United States is currently providing some $1.2 billion a year to the region in economic aid. But I felt bound to add something else, something crucial: The answer to Central America's problems is political and economic freedom, not Soviet tanks and ruthless regimes like the Communist dictatorship in Nicaragua that wages war against its own people. And this is why the United States will continue to support those fighting for freedom and democracy in Nicaragua


Remarks at the Annual Dinner of the Conservative Political Action Conference 
January 30, 1986

Well, something has happened in America. In 5 short years, we have seen the kind of political change rarely seen in a generation on nearly every issue: Federal spending, tax cuts, deregulation, the fight against career criminals and for tough judges, military readiness, resistance to Soviet expansionism, and the need for candor about the struggle between freedom and totalitarianism. The old taboos and superstitions of liberalism have collapsed and all but blown away, to be replaced by a robust and enlightened conservatism, a conservatism that brings with it economic prosperity, personal opportunity, and a shining hope that someday all the peoples of the world—from Afghanistan to Nicaragua to Poland and, yes, to Angola—will know the blessings of liberty and live in the light of freedom


Address Before a Joint Session of Congress on the State of the Union 
February 4, 1986

To those imprisoned in regimes held captive, to those beaten for daring to fight for freedom and democracy—for their right to worship, to speak, to live, and to prosper in the family of free nations—we say to you tonight: You are not alone, freedom fighters. America will support with moral and material assistance your right not just to fight and die for freedom but to fight and win freedom—to win freedom in Afghanistan, in Angola, in Cambodia, and in Nicaragua. This is a great moral challenge for the entire free world. 
Surely no issue is more important for peace in our own hemisphere, for the security of our frontiers, for the protection of our vitalinterests, than to achieve democracy in Nicaragua and to protect Nicaragua's democratic neighbors. This year I will be asking Congress for the means to do what must be done for that great and good cause. As [former Senator Henry M.] Scoop Jackson, the inspiration for our Bipartisan Commission on Central America, once said, "In matters of national security, the best politics is no politics."



Remarks at the Annual National Prayer Breakfast 
February 6, 1986

Mother Teresa shines with joy in spite of the fact that she spends so much of her time in the unhappiest places on this Earth. If you look at the world stage, you don't see a lot to make you glad, but in the midst of hellish circumstances—in Mexico after the earthquake, in Ethiopia during a famine, in South Africa and Angola and Nicaragua—in all those painful places we still see joy, God's gift, and the energy that it gives


Remarks on Signing the Message on America's Agenda for the Future and the Annual Economic Report of the President 
February 6, 1986

In the area of foreign relations, we've made our goals clear: continued harmony with our allies, renewed progress toward a more stable peace with our adversaries, and increased respect for human rights everywhere. We've also made it clear, and I'm eager to stress today, that our desire to cut the budget will notbeallowed to collide with our need for a strong defense. Gramm-Rudman-Hollings will be used as a shovel to dig us out of the results of deficit spending. But we will notallow it to be used as a cannon pointed on our real and legitimate defense needs. We've also made it clear that ourcommitment to help freedom fighters throughout the world continues unabated. We know what's happening in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola, and Nicaragua; and we support the efforts of those who continue, with little help from the world, to fight a lonely struggle against the enemies of freedom and human rights


Remarks at the 1986 Reagan Administration Executive Forum 
February 6, 1986

And finally, there's one issue we will face in coming months which touches on both our ideals as free people and the security of our country. Today there are brave men and women fighting for their freedom and independence against great odds. In Afghanistan, in Angola, and in Nicaragua, lightly armed freedom fighters face Soviet tanks, artillery, and helicopter gunships. Edmund Burke, that great British statesman who championed the cause of American independence, once wrote, "When bad men combine, the good must associate; else they may fall one by one ...."Well, today, we cannot sit back and idly watch as the new imperialism grinds down courageous people fighting for their liberty. We must give those heroes what they need, not just to fight and die for freedom but to win for freedom. 
And nowhere is this challenge more vital to our own security than in Central America. The Soviet Union has armed the Sandinista dictatorship to the teeth. The regime in Managua, almost immediately upon seizing power, started undermining its neighbors and suppressing therights of its people at home. Those who've taken up arms against the Communists are fighting for therights to speak and pray, to organize labor unions, to own land, and to direct the course of government through free elections. The choice is helping these freedom fighters or seeing a Communistic dictatorship established in the heart of Central America, another Cuba. The stakes are high. We must provide the Nicaraguan freedom fighters with what they need to bring democracy to their country


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters 
February 10, 1986

And of course, it would be undesirable to go back to that era. Life then was simpler, but it was harder. And yet, when in the late seventies the liberal entertainment—or experiment, I should say, had last wound down, when the ceaseless expansion of economic growth and weakness had ended— r eroded our foreign policy, I believed it was time to return government to its few and legitimate duties, time to reassert private values and the importance of the family. In our first term, we cut taxes, and we started to rebuild our defenses. Today the economy has seen 38 months of growth, and as freedom movements in Nicaragua and elsewhere attest, there is new hope for the cause of liberty around the world. Now we must take the next steps, steps which I outlined in my State of the Union Address


Interview With Lou Cannon and David Hoffman of the Washington Post 
February 10, 1986

The President. I don't see how they could go on permanently without having some aid, particularly in the face of the extensive aid that they're getting from the Soviet Union and Cuba with regard to advanced weapons systems and so forth. They've got to be able to protect themselves. 
The President. I'm going to go all out to try and get them the kind of aid that they must have. 
The President. No, I don't think it has to at all. I think—and this is what the Contadora process is aiming at—is what we suggested a year ago, just about a year ago now. And that is that the Sandinista government and their former allies, who are now the contras, who fought the revolution against Somoza, that they come together with the church acting as a mediator; they have an armistice and come together and negotiate out how they can arrive at a consensus government that will be what they actually fought the revolution for. 
Remember that they appealed to the Organization of American States for help back when they were fighting against Somoza. And they got the help they asked for, which was a request for Somoza to step down so the killing could stop—and he did. But in return for that, they had given a program to the OAS of what their goals were, and it was democracy; it was a pluralistic government and human rights taken care of and freedom of the press and speech and labor unions and so forth. The Sandinistas then seized the revolution and took it away from the others. And they have turned it into the totalitarian state that it is. But I think that the Sandinistas also are being hard pressed because this thing that has been going on has given them great economic problems. And they are totally dependent on the Communist bloc for their survival. 
The President. That's what we've always said we want. 


Remarks and an Informal Exchange With Reporters on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
February 18, 1986

The President. In my State of the Union Address, I said it was vital to our nation's security that we provide the freedom fighters in Nicaragua and other countries with not only the means to die for freedom but also to win freedom. There are many ways in which a democratic outcome can be achieved in Nicaragua. It could happen at the negotiating table or by the success of the ground resistance. But one thing is certain: We must provide more effective assistance, and we must lift the restrictions which now tie our hands. In Congress and, in fact, throughout the world, the opinion about the Sandinistas seems to be shifting toward our view. They don't have many defenders anymore. The debate now is over what we should do about them. 
The program approved last year, the $27 million in humanitarian assistance, has helped to maintain the pressure of the resistance on the Sandinistas. The resistance has continued to grow and is operating deep inside Nicaragua. But we have to do more to help them. As I've said before, you can't fight attack helicopters piloted by Cubans with Band-Aids and mosquito nets. 
So, this is what the meeting is going to be about today, as soon as we continue the meeting. 

Remarks to Citizens in St. George's, Grenada 
February 20, 1986

Today in Nicaragua we see a chain of events similar to what happened here. We hear the same excuses made for the Communists, while the people of Nicaragua sell [see] their freedom slowly but surely eaten away. Edmund Burke, a British parliamentarian who championed the cause of American independence, once wrote, "When bad men combine, the good must associate; else they will fall one by one .... "Well, those words still ring true. That's why we came to your aid. And that is why the United States must help those struggling for freedom in Nicaragua. In the cause of liberty, all free people are part of the same family. We should stand together as brothers and sisters. And if we do, the Nicaraguan people will be able to free themselves from Communist tyranny and win the liberty that you now enjoy in Grenada


Radio Address to the Nation on Grenada and Nicaragua 
February 22, 1986

The Communists didn't succeed in Grenada, yet a similar chain of events had been happening in Nicaragua. We hear the same old lies, while the Nicaraguan people see their freedom being stolen away. The Communists have suppressed free speech and free press. Nicaragua's Communist dictators have launched a systematic attack against the church, its priests and bishops. And government-instigated mobs mocked His Holiness John Paul II. Meanwhile, the dictatorship is being armed to the teeth with Soviet military equipment. And everyone from the Soviets, Cubans, East Germans to the PLO and Qadhafi's Libyans are turning Nicaragua into a staging area for subversion and aggression against their and our neighbors. 
But there's hope for the Nicaraguan people because freedom fighters are now struggling against the Communist dictatorship. Their ranks are filled with campesinos, small farmers who own a few acres of land. Many of them fought against past dictatorships. All they want is to be free and to live under democratic government. Helping those fighting for their own freedom in Nicaragua is both morally right and vital to our national security. If the Communists consolidate their power, their campaign of violence throughout Central America will go into high gear, bringing new dangers and sending hundreds of thousands of refugees streaming toward our 2,000-mile long southern border. 
Nineteen American servicemen lost their lives, and many more were wounded liberating Grenada. If we have the courage to do what is necessary now, helping those who are struggling to bring freedom to their country, the Nicaraguan people will be able to liberate themselves. They don't want our troops, just our aid. The people of Grenada know that doing nothing is the worst alternative. Let's make certain we all live up to our responsibility


Address to the Nation on National Security 
February 26, 1986

We knew immediate changes had to be made. So, here's what we did: We set out to show that the long string of governments falling under Communist domination was going to end, and we're doing it. In the 1970's one strategic country after another fell under the domination of the Soviet Union. The fall of Laos, Cambodia, and South Vietnam gave the Soviet Union a strategic position on the South China Sea. The invasion of Afghanistan cut nearly in half Soviet flying time to the Persian Gulf. Communist takeovers in South Yemen and Ethiopia put the Soviets astride the Red Sea, entryway to the Suez Canal. Pro-Soviet regimes in Mozambique and Angola strengthened the Soviet position in southern Africa. And finally, Grenada and Nicaragua gave Moscow two new beachheads right on the doorstep of the United States. 
In these last 5 years, not one square inch of territory has been lost, and Grenada has been set free. When we arrived in 1981, guerrillas in El Salvador had launched what they called their final offensive to make that nation the second Communist state on the mainland of North America. Many people said the situation was hopeless; they refused to help. We didn't agree; we did help. And today those guerrillas are in retreat. El Salvador is a democracy, and freedom fighters are challenging Communist regimes in Nicaragua, Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, and Ethiopia


Remarks at a White House Meeting for Supporters of United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance
March 3, 1986

The President. Well, welcome all of you, and I know that four of us who just came in here are deeply grateful to you for the cause that brings you all together. I have just met with these leaders of the united Nicaraguan opposition who represent the hope for democracy in Nicaragua: Arturo Cruz, Adolpho Calero, and Alfonso Robelo. 
Haiti and the Philippines have demonstrated the desire of people worldwide for democratic rule. In Central America great strides toward democracy have been taken in every country except Nicaragua, where the Sandinista dictatorship is consolidating Communist control. I think the world is watching to see if Congress is as committed to democracy in Nicaragua, in our own hemisphere, as it was in the Philippines. 
The Nicaraguan democratic resistance, 40 percent former Sandinistas, now confronts new Soviet weapons, including the same helicopters used to massacre the resistance in Afghanistan. And democratic reconciliation remains possible if we support those who share our ideals. However, if we don't provide our friends with the means to stop these Soviet gunships, Nicaragua's freedom fighters will suffer the same fate as the Hungarian freedom fighters did 30 years ago, who had nothing to defend themselves against Soviet tanks. 
The second question that'll be answered with this vote is whether Congress is as determined to keep Central America free as Ortega and Castro are to make it Communist. I've asked for $100 million in assistance, and we'll fight for it. Simple humanitarian aid is not enough. As these gentlemen definitely agree, you can't stop tanks and gunships with bandages and bed rolls. Congressional defeat of this aid proposal could well deliver Nicaragua permanently to the Communist bloc. Procrastination risks a military victory for the Sandinistas, who hope to finish off the freedom fighters before American help can arrive. We implore Congress not to delay and to provide that help. For 2 years, the freedom fighters have gotten no military assistance from the United States, except that that some of you know has been provided; and Moscow has provided a half a billion dollars in arms. Defeat for the contras would mean a second Cuba on the mainland of North America. It'd be a major defeat in the quest for democracy in our hemisphere, and it would mean consolidation of a privileged sanctuary for terrorists and subversives just 2 days' driving time from Harlingen, Texas. 
Now, I don't think any of us are going to try and sell the idea that just a little Nicaragua could represent a threat to the United States, but that isn't what they have in mind either. They have in mind being a launching pad for revolution up and down, first of all, Latin America. We have the definite proof that the Sandinista government continues to send arms to the guerrillas in El Salvador that are trying still to get rid of that democratic government that is now installed there. And can anyone imagine how much more help they would be able to give if once they were totally victorious and had no opposition within their own country anymore, and what they could do to unseat the neighboring democracies? I think it would place in jeopardy the survival of each of those small and fragile democracies now in Central America, open up the possibility of Soviet military bases on America's doorstep, could threaten the security of the Panama Canal, inaugurate a vast migration northward to the United States of hundreds of thousands of refugees. And those who would invite this strategic disaster by abandoning yet another fighting ally of this country in the field will be held fully accountable by history. 
The President. I'm a little more optimistic than that. We're going to tell our story to the American people, and we're going to continue to work on Congress. And I refuse to give up. 
I remember a man named Winston Churchill who said, "Never give in. Never, never, never." So we won't. 


Remarks to Jewish Leaders During a White House Briefing on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 5, 1986

Well, that statement has become even more urgently true today. There's a vote coming up in Congress of utmost importance, and I have to tell you I need your understanding and support. I'm talking about our request for $100 million in aid to the democratic resistance forces in Nicaragua. Nicaragua may seem a small country, faraway. And why, some wonder, should we care what's happening there? Why should we spend $100 million on someone else's fight? Well, I want to talk about why we must care and why the United States has not only a moral but a strategic interest in supporting freedom in Central America. 
There are many things at stake in this vote: the hopes of the Nicaraguan people to live in freedom and democracy; the hopes of the people of Central and South America to live in peace, free from Communist subversion. But there's another issue that overrides all others: the national security of the United States. Let there be no mistake: If we fail to provide timely assistance now, if we abandon our allies in freedom and allow the Communists to establish a permanent beachhead on the American mainland, we will be living with the consequences for decades to come. 
There's been a lot of misinformation floating around about the true character of the Sandinista regime. Perhaps it would be more accurate to call it disinformation. I sometimes wonder why people don't just listen to what these Communists themselves say; because when they're not up here in Washington lobbying Congress, they're quite open about their true intentions. For instance, take their ties to terrorist groups in the Middle East. Those ties go back more than a decade and a half. Tomas Borge, Nicaragua's Minister of Interior, was one of many Sandinista Communists to train in PLO camps in Lebanon and Syria and Libya. To quote Borge's own words: "We say to our brother Arafat that Nicaragua is his land and the PLO cause is the cause of the Sandinistas." Yasser Arafat returned the compliment saying, "The triumph of the Nicaraguans is the PLO's triumph." 
Or listen to what the Sandinista Communists say about Qadhafi, whom they call "our great friend"—Borge again: "Our friendship with Libya is eternal. Libya is a people which, in accordance with our experience, has developed solidarity without frontiers." Remember that one: "Solidarity without frontiers." Qadhafi, meanwhile, has been openly sending them millions of dollars of arms, because, he says: "The Nicaraguan Communists fight with Libya. They fight America," he put it, "on its own ground." The Sandinistas have also drawn close to the Iranians. Just last year the Iranian Prime Minister [Mir Hosein Musavi-Khamenei], who's thought to control Iran's terrorist apparatus, said to Daniel Ortega—and I quote again: "We consider your revolutionary country as our own home." 
The Sandinista Communists have matched their words with actions, joining the PLO in terrorist assaults in the Middle East, including the attempted overthrow of the Hussein government and the hijacking of an El Al airliner. The Sandinista terrorist killed in that El Al hijacking, Patrick Arguayo Ryan, is revered as a hero by the Nicaraguan Government. They even named a large power dam after him. The Nicaraguan Communists claim that they're not anti-Semitic, they're just anti-Zionist. Well, as anti-Zionists, they desecrated Managua's synagogue and drove the small Jewish community into exile. Isaac Stavisky, who was there, tells of the anti-Jewish Sandinista graffiti: "Death to the Jewish Pigs," with red and black FSLN [Sandinista National Liberation Front] initials next to it, and "Beware Sandinista Justice." Well, what is the official Sandinista position on this persecution of the Jewish community? The Jews, they say, have a "bourgeois mentality" that prevented them to adjusting to communism. I'll buy that kind of a bourgeois mentality anytime. 
Managua has also rolled out the welcome mat for terrorists from around the world, not just Cubans, Bulgarians, Libyans, PLO, and Iranians, but members of the Baader-Meinhof gang, the Basque ETA [Basque Fatherland and Freedom], and the Italian Red Brigade. These criminals and lunatics now camp out on the doorstep of the United States. Let's not kid ourselves; the Sandinistas are avowed, dedicated Communists. And Communists since the days of Lenin have advocated terrorism as a legitimate means to attain political ends. Incidentally, Mr. Lenin's picture is quite prominent on new issues of postage stamps in Nicaragua. If the Sandinistas are allowed to consolidate their hold on Nicaragua, we'll have a permanent staging ground for terrorism. A home away from home for Qadhafi, Arafat, and the Ayatollah—just 3 hours by air from the U.S. border. The recent terrorist attack in the Palace of Justice in Colombia in which the Sandinista Communists were implicated is just the beginning, the first rumblings of a Communist earthquake that could overrun Latin America. 
The Prime Ministers of nine of the Caribbean island nations, when I was in Grenada just a week or two ago, told me that Nicaragua represented the greatest threat to their freedom and democracy—and they brought up the subject to me. They begged us to continue aiding the freedom fighters. Some still insist that the Sandinistas are only nationalists. The Sandinistas themselves laugh at the idea. They are true international Communists who talk of a revolution without borders and who have eagerly put their country at the disposal of Fidel Castro and the Soviet Union. 
Everyone who's thinking about this aid package should ask themselves one question: If the Sandinistas succeed in throwing the whole of Central America into turmoil, if the United States must contend with a growing number of hostile, aggressive Communist states close to its borders, how willing or able will we be able to meet ourcommitments to other allies? Our supply lines to Israel and our NATO allies run through the Caribbean. The Soviets are already banking on this fact. Even some in Congress would rather ignore it. Today Nicaragua is the focus of Soviet efforts at destabilization in the Western Hemisphere. 
Recently there's been an intensive effort to discredit the democratic opposition in Nicaragua. Well, let me say a few words about disinformation. Some of us have been around long enough to know that disinformation has a long history. I remember the reports of Walter Duranty from Stalin's Russia, who denied the existence of the forced famine, even though he had witnessed firsthand Stalin's genocide. I remember Lincoln Steffens' famous remark when he returned from that land of slaughter and declared: "I have been over into the future, and it works." I remember Herbert Matthews' reports on Castro before he came to power, calling him a democrat and the hope of Cuba. And to some of you who are really too young to remember this, even people around our country were calling him the George Washington of Cuba, and George rolled over in his grave. 
On national television the other night, [House Majority Leader] Jim Wright said that at one time the revolutionaries in Latin America, men such as Bolivar and San Martin, emulated our democratic revolution. Well, some still do. The freedom fighters in Nicaragua fight for democracy, too. They, too, are the moral descendants of men at Morristown and Valley Forge, though the tyranny they fight against is more brutal than anything our forefathers could have imagined. 
Soon Congress will be making the historic decision whether or not to help these brave men and women. The ranks of the freedom fighters continue to swell. If we give them the aid they need, the Nicaraguan people can win this battle for freedom on their own. American troops have not been asked for and are not needed. We must make sure they never are needed. We send money and material now so we'll never have to send our own American boys. But if the Members of Congress hide their heads in the sand and pretend the strategic threat in Nicaragua will go away, they are courting disaster, and history will hold them accountable. If we don't want to see the map of Central America covered in a sea of red, eventually lapping at our own borders, we mustact now. 
With your help and the help of other freedom-loving Americans, we can succeed in turning the tide to democracy in Nicaragua. We must succeed; nothing less than the security of the United States is at stake. Thank you all, and God bless you for letting me talk to you. 

Remarks at a White House Meeting With the House Republican Whip Organization on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 6, 1986

Even as we meet, Nicaragua's dictator is back in Havana meeting with Castro. And I think it's significant that Bayardo Arce, one of Nicaragua's nine commandantes, was the first foreigner asked to address the recent Soviet Party Congress. It's up to us to persuade the Members of Congress of what the consequences will be for Nicaragua, for Central America, and for the safety of our own country, if we fail to act. And that's what we propose to do, is act all-out for the next 2 weeks


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Announcing the Appointment of Philip C. Habib as Special Envoy for Central America 
March 7, 1986

Now there's another difficult job before us. We believe that the Nicaraguan people, just like the Filipino people, have theright to self-determination through democracy. And we in this administration and in Congress must now decide whether Nicaragua is to be the next staging ground for subversion, terrorism, and Soviet Communist expansion on our doorstep. And I want to emphasize today that there can be a diplomatic solution for Central America. It is the solution that will come when the Nicaraguan Communists finally agree to sit down and talk with their opposition, both armed and unarmed, to bring an end to the strife and the repression in their country. 
Three days ago, President Duarte of El Salvador came forward with a bold and promising new proposal. In a letter to Daniel Ortega, President Duarte offered to resume talks with the guerrillas in El Salvador if the Nicaraguan Communist regime will begin simultaneous talks with the democratic resistance in that country. Yesterday, the three leaders of the united Nicaraguan opposition gave their full endorsement to this proposal. They are ready and willing to seek a political solution; so is the United States. On February 10th I sent a letter to the eight heads of state of the Contadora support group nations. In that letter I said that the United States is prepared to begin simultaneous talks with the regime in Nicaragua when that regime sits down with the democratic resistance. 
I'm asking Ambassador Habib to meet next week with President Duarte to discuss his peace initiative. And our task is to ensure that democracy can succeed. We will continue to make every effort, as we have in the past, to pursue change through diplomatic means. But let there be no misunderstanding; Ambassador Habib's efforts to achieve a diplomatic solution must be accompanied by an increasing level of pressure on the Nicaraguan Communists. 
The legislative proposal for aid to the unified Nicaraguan democratic opposition must be approved. What we're asking Congress for is the tools so that Ambassador Habib can do the job.
Now—

Radio Address to the Nation on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 8, 1986

I want to speak to you today about our request to help the Nicaraguan freedom fighters, which Congress should be voting on within the next 2 weeks. Let me say at the outset, this will be a vote of supreme importance. History will soon record whether the United States Congress, faced with a powerful Soviet-bloc challenge to capture Nicaragua and spread communism throughout Central America, stood by and watched or had the courage to stand up for freedom and America's security. 
The facts are clear, and the facts are compelling. The days of pretending Nicaragua is some aggrieved, misunderstood country, an innocent lamb of peace wishing only to live in harmony with its people and neighbors, have long passed. Nicaragua is a country held captive by a cruel clique of deeply committed Communists at war with God and man from their very first days. Between 1979 and 1981, when a trusting America was still providing more economic aid to Nicaragua than was any other nation, the Nicaraguan regime was already saying Marxist-Leninism is the scientific doctrine that guides our revolution; and this revolution goes beyond our borders. These men are deadly serious. Of all the nations in Central America, only Nicaragua suspends all civil rights; only Nicaragua suppresses political parties and refuses any dialog with its opponents; only Nicaragua murders political dissenters and indoctrinates children with class hatred; only Nicaragua persecutes the Catholic Church, humiliates its Cardinal and the Pope, and tortures believers of other religions, from Mormons to Evangelicals to Miskito Indians. 
Above all, only Nicaragua has become a wedge of aggression that intimidates and undermines its neighbors. Nicaragua's policy to foment violence was laid out at a secret meeting back in 1979 involving all military, intelligence, and security organizations, including the defense and secret police ministries headed by key Communists Humberto Ortega and Tomas Borge. Now this dictatorship becomes more dangerous as a flood of weapons and manpower pour in from the Soviet bloc and their coldblooded allies, the PLO and Libya. One thing alone unites these enemies of democracy: hatred for America and America's values. These men did not come to Central America to spread good will; these men came to do us harm, and they mean to succeed. As Qadhafi gloated: Supporting Nicaragua means a great thing; it means fighting America near its own borders. 
How can Congress ignore this storm gathering so close to our homeland? From amassing a military force larger than all other countries in the region to building the longest military airstrip in Central America-long enough to handle Soviet Backfire bombers—to being chief conduit of weapons to El Salvador's guerrillas, the radicals of Honduras, Costa Rica, Guatemala, and the terrorists who recently attacked the Palace of Justice in Colombia, Nicaragua today rivals Cuba as principal Communist warehouse and exporter of violence in our Western Hemisphere. 
Soviet Chairman Andrey Gromyko was once quoted as saying: "America's greatest weakness is its inability to understand the Soviet Union's final goals." He was right. Today some still question our honorable commitment to peace. Well, forgive me, but those questions should be directed to the Communists, not to the United States Government, to Nicaragua's dictator, who's been back in Havana again after the Cuban Third Party Congress vowed to defeat the United States and make communism victorious worldwide. It is the Nicaraguan Communists who dismissed all our efforts to promote internal dialog and who suspended talks with their neighbors, but we're still trying. 
Next week I'm sending Ambassador Habib to meet with President Duarte of El Salvador, who has offered to resume talks with the guerrillas in El Salvador if the Nicaraguan Communists begin simultaneous talks with the prodemocracy forces in that country. Yet if the freedom fighters get only Band-Aids from the United States, while Nicaraguans get helicopter gunships from the Soviets—the same death machines they're using to massacre the Afghan people—the Communists will feel no need to negotiate. Without power, diplomacy will be without leverage. 
My fellow Americans, the question is not whether we want peace in Central America. The question is: Will we meet a growing danger from the Soviets, East Germans, Bulgarians, North Koreans, Cubans, and PLO camped on our doorstep—a danger which already is disrupting peace in Central America and will soon imperil our own security? That is the question which must be answered within the next 2 weeks. Our policy can keep Central America free without committing American troops

Remarks at a White House Briefing for Supporters of United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 10, 1986

We've managed to work with the Congress to maintain a steady increase in the defense budget, to rebuild our strategic forces, to achieve a bipartisan consensus on the Kissinger commission. We managed to get aid to places like El Salvador and other nations in Central America and last year to not only get the approval of humanitarian aid to the freedom fighters but accomplish the near spontaneous repeal of the Clark amendment. You remember that that was the thing that prevented us from giving some support when we could have prevented there being a Communist government in Angola. Only a few years ago, to hope for all of this would have seemed to be asking for far too much. Yet all of this has happened, and I think it will continue to happen. What we're seeing is the end of the post-Vietnam syndrome, the return of realism about the Communist danger. And now we're ready for one of the final acts. The importance of this moment cannot be underestimated. Think what signal we'll be sending to the rest of the world when and if this aid to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua is passed. 
And wouldn't it be wonderful to someday see in Nicaragua the restoration of the democratic dream, to see in downtown Managua celebrations similar to those that we've seen recently in Queen's Park, Manila, and Port-au-Prince, Haiti. And I think it's there for the asking, and so, too, is the moral obligation. At a critical early stage, the United States gave hope and help to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. We have a moral obligation now, after a couple of years' gap, to continue that support. 
And they don't ask for that all-out sacrifice from us. To the contrary, they don't want our troops. They just want the means and the tools they need to get the job done. And for those people who would like to call them some kind of terrorists, let me just tell you one thing. One of our own people down there sometime ago, not too long ago, speaking to them, asked them why they weren't doing what the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador were doing. Why didn't they hit targets like powerplants and so forth to cause more distress to the Sandinista government? And those contras, those freedom fighters, said: "No, that would hurt the people of Nicaragua, and we don't want to hurt the people, our people, in Nicaragua." I think they've earned our respect and our support.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 11, 1986

This afternoon I'd like to discuss a matter of overriding national importance—been talking about it here all through lunch. But it's the debate, the importance of the debate on Nicaragua. Nearly 7 years ago, the Sandinistas and all those others who'd rebelled against Somoza brought months of fighting to an end when they marched down the avenues of Managua and took control of the government. Thousands of Nicaraguans banked the streets. The new leaders claimed to embrace the highest ideals of democracy and individual liberty, and in the course of some 18 months, the United States provided them with $118 million in economic aid. Nicaraguan businessmen began to hope for new prosperity. Nicaraguan journalists began to hope for freedom of the press. And throughout the country, millions of Nicaraguans dared to hope for democracy. And soon these hopes were crushed. Just months after taking power, the Communists began doing what they'd planned all along—they ousted their critics and fellow revolutionaries, they tightened their military grip on the nation, and then they censored the media in Nicaragua and suppressed free speech. 
Today Radio Catolica, the voice of the Catholic Church, has been silenced; and Cardinal Obando y Bravo, primate of Nicaragua, has said: "We want to state clearly that this government is totalitarian. We are dealing with an enemy of the Church." La Prensa, the last independent newspaper, is subject to constant censorship and often violent threats. The Communists have driven the Jewish community from the country and persecuted the Miskito Indians, killing and imprisoning thousands of these gentle people. Soviet, East German, Libyan, PLO, Cuban troops and advisers swarm over the country in the thousands. Corruption in the regime has become blatant. Last October Commandante Ortega pulled up to a Manhattan optician's shop in a 17-car motorcade to spend $3,500 on designer glasses for himself, his wife, and his daughter. The Sandinistas, faced with internal unrest and disaffection, have responded to the cries of repression by the Nicaraguan people by building nine new prisons; Somoza had only one. 
In a century that has witnessed monstrous crimes, Nicaragua has become the site of one of the most harrowing: the murder of liberty in a nation that had the chance to become free. Some predicted that Nicaragua would become like Cuba: a staging post for Communist subversion throughout Central and South America. Well, the prediction has already come true. The Nicaraguan Communists have built their lightly armed, 1979 force of 5,000 into a heavily armed army and militia of about 120,000. They are the principal suppliers of the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador. They provided the weapons to those who carried out the recent assassination of Colombia's Supreme Court justices. 
Well, they are the principal suppliers, I've said, of the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador, and what they did in Colombia—we have seen that and the great tragedy there. Hundreds of terrorists with clear ties to Nicaragua are now located in countries throughout Central and South America. Sandinista military units regularly cross the Nicaraguan border, intimidating their neighbors in hopes of promoting unrest. Have the people in so many of these countries struggled to reemerge into the light of democracy only to be confronted with Soviet-backed efforts to subvert their new governments and snuff out their resurgent liberty? 
Now Nicaragua, this Soviet satellite on our own continent, threatens the national interests of the United States. In purely military terms, Nicaragua's military bases could be used for strikes against our Caribbean sealanes, avenues that bear roughly half our foreign trade and half our oil imports; but the graver risk arises from the threat that the Communists will continue to spread violence and unrest among their neighbors. Refugees—millions of them-would stream toward our borders, and for States like Florida and Texas, this flood would make the Mariel boatlift look like a trickle. In time, the United States could be forced to surrender Central America to the Soviet sphere. 
Some say to our administration, why notnegotiate? Well, that's a good question, but it's directed to the wrong party. Nine times we have sought to bring about direct negotiations between the resistance and the Sandinistas. Nine times the Sandinistas have refused to negotiate. So the truth is clear: The Sandinistas will come to the table only when they see the carrot of peaceful settlement backed up by the stick of well-equipped armed opposition. 
Today the opposition, the brave Nicaraguan freedom fighters, numbers over 20,000 and has the growing support of the Nicaraguan people. To give the freedom fighters the help they need in countering their Soviet-equipped opponents, I've asked the Congress to vote them $100 million in aid of already appointed funds, a modest amount when compared to what the Soviets are providing the Sandinistas. And make that point clear there: This is not new money that's going to add to the deficit. This is money already appropriated that is going to be redirected to this effort. Just how effective this aid to the freedom fighters would be becomes clear in considering their past support. The Soviet bloc gave the Nicaraguan Communists over $500 million in aid. But last year we provided the freedom fighters with less than $27 million in boots and Band-Aids. What happened? The freedom fighters have been battered. You can't defend yourself against Soviet helicopter gunships with bedrolls. But even at that, the freedom fighters were able to use mobility and surprise to keep the Sandinista forces largely on the defensive. 
Now, we need to provide the aid we've requested, this time military as well as humanitarian, to see the ranks of the freedom fighters swell and their victories mount, forcing the Sandinistas to come to the table at last. In the last few days there's been talk here in Washington of compromise on this issue: smaller amounts of aid, delay in providing it, restrictions on the uses to which it could be put—all the usual temporizing and quibbles. Well, let me set the record straight. The Soviets continue to fund the Nicaraguan Communists with massive infusions of arms, cash, and so-called advisers. To delay or reduce the aid we've requested for the freedom fighters could be to send too little, too late. Those who would compromise must not compromise the freedom fighters' lives nor their immediate defensive needs. They must not compromise Latin America's democracies or our own southern borders. They must not compromise freedom. 
So we callupon the Congress to vote the aid we've requested and to do so without delay. And we ask you, the members of the press, to help-you who can be so persuasive by way of your editorial pages and whose opinions are so valued in the communities you serve. And that we stand for freedom—just as we stand for freedom in the rugged land of Haiti, just as we believe in human rights for the green islands of the Philippines, let us take a stand for democracy in the mountains and the plains of Nicaragua. 
The President. Well, I hadn't used it. But let me just suggest where there is one difference. The domino theory was expressed as a theory of what could happen with regard to the Vietnam situation. But here, we have firm evidence. We have the documents that were seized in Grenada, documents from the Soviet Union; documents from the Cuban Government to their counterparts there in Grenada and outlining the future plans and naming the future targets. And many of those documents began with the gloating sentences: "We now have Cuba and Nicaragua and Grenada..." and then went on to where the other targets are. So, the dominoes have already been named by the people who are going to tip them over. But I would like to also say-and with all respect—before we start sneering at those who threatened dominoes, the North Vietnamese are now at the border of Thailand, and the dominoes did begin to fall. 
The President. Yes. I believe that the image of the great colossus of the North is too fresh in the peoples' minds in Latin America for us to even think about sending troops of that kind. But where—I have said there could come a day, and it wouldn't be going in to intervene there—but where we were under hostile attack ourselves, because that cancer that is Nicaragua would have been allowed to spread until it became a force that could target things of interest to us and of interest to our national security in the Caribbean, to say nothing of—well, one of their officials early on made a statement about that we could expect to see them at the borders of Arizona and New Mexico, meaning that they did have ambitions. This is the threat to the possibility of American forces—that there would come a day when we, ourselves, would be faced with hostile actions against our best interests. 
The President. No, they haven't. And our own polls indicate that there is a great feeling and many people saying what are we doing in that little country, and where is it and so forth. I think that a great many people—there's a lack of understanding, and that's why I'm going on the air Sunday night. But also there is a great disinformation network that is at work throughout our country, and it's a custom that was established by the Soviet Union. And a great many people are confused. They think, for example, the message has been that—what are we doing backing revolutionaries who are trying to overthrow a legitimate government? Well, there's nothing legitimate about the Sandinista government at all. After a revolution against Somoza, they took over at the point of a gun, they ousted the revolutionaries who didn't agree with them. They have had one so-called election, if you could call it that. They wouldn't let anyone run against them, and they wouldn't allow campaigning. And then they said they'd done their democratic duty and came to New York to buy those designer glasses. So it isn't an established or a legitimate government. But the American people—Thomas Jefferson said if the American people know all the facts, they will never make a mistake. And I think we haven't completed the job of letting the American people know all the facts. And we're sure going to try to do that. 
The President. Well, a number of people that go down there, and that are sympathetic to the other, and then come back and tell the stories of what they've seen—no repression and the people are happy with the government and so forth. There's quite a network of those covering lots of lines of activities, probably well-intentioned; I don't know. I'm not going to fault their motives. 
But also the other day I had handed to me a slick paper publication, a magazine-$3.75 an issue—and this magazine is published by the Nicaraguan Information Foundation. And it is filled with propaganda. It is a propaganda thing against the contras and against us and in favor of them. And one prominent university professor had written a lead article in this 'particular issue, and if that's what he tells his students, God help them, because it was pure propaganda. And they've hired lobbyists in this country, professional lobbyists who make their case before the Congress. And it's false stories that can be refuted by others that go down there. 
I remember one story having to do with a Catholic bishop who was hailed in the press as having rescued some refugees that he was trying to get across the Honduran border. On foot they were making their way through the jungles. And the story said that they were attacked by contras before they got to the Honduran border. Well, this bishop came back to the United States, and I phoned him and asked him about his story and all about this. And he said, yes, he had led this band of refugees out of Nicaragua into Honduras. "But," he said, "before we got to the border we were attacked by Sandinista armed forces, and we were rescued by the contras." Now, the story somehow went off on a different tack when it was published. 
But it is a program of—constantly aimed at—that big imperialist United States is off again doing the wrong thing. But I don't think we are, and I think that the Nicaraguan people—you'd be surprised at the proportion of the contras who are former Sandinista soldiers drafted into that army, but who deserted. You'd be surprised at what we've heard from nearby governments about the flood of young men whose families smuggle them out of the country before they can be drafted into that army. And the—much of the leadership, this charge that they are Somozistas—the contras. Well, the leaders—two of the three that were here in the United States recently were both imprisoned by Somoza, and they are former revolutionaries, most of these people. 

Informal Exchange With Reporters Prior to Special Envoy Philip C. Habib's Departure for Central America 
March 12, 1986

The President. If there was any benefit and that presented an opportunity, I'm sure that he would. But because we are still seeking some openings, some negotiations with the Sandinistas, which, well, nine times now, they have refused. 
The President. You don't go where you're not invited. 
The President. I trust in his judgment. If anything comes up that would show that there might be any prospect or any profit in doing that, I am sure that he would make that decision. 
The President. You bet he does. 
The President. Sam [Sam Donaldson, ABC News], the critics have been making ridiculous noises for a long time and that's one of the most ridiculous. 
The President. Nine times we have tried to persuade the Sandinista government to enter into negotiations and nine times we've gotten nowhere. 
The President. Maybe we have a difference of opinion. 
The President. They haven't met Ambassador Habib yet. 
The President. He'll make the decision on that. 
The President. As I tried to explain the other day, and I didn't say anything about me making a compromise, I said we're going to listen to, we'll talk to anyone that's got anything to offer. 
The President. Well, I've told you, we've gotten no place in nine efforts of negotiations. 
The President. We're continuing to talk about all possibilities like that. 


Interview With Representatives of the Baltimore Sun 
March 12, 1986

The President. Well, I think there's several ways in which things like that are being suggested. First of all, from the time that they would—if they would vote to approve this aid, there would be a period of time before it would actually be carried out. And, yes, if there's any possibility that during that time, and perhaps to forestall such aid, that they would then be willing to come to the negotiating table—as we've tried to get them nine times already—and to negotiate with the contras, that'd be fine. But if we're talking about some kind of a compromise where the Congress imposes a delay and takes the trigger away from me in- 
The President. Yes, there would be a second vote and so forth, I think this would be most counterproductive because the Sandinistas would feel they could hang on longer with the hope that we still wouldn't get what we're asking for. 
The President. Well, I'd be willing to talk to them about something of this kind. I wouldn't want to commit to this because, as I say, the important thing is that the Sandinista government must not be left any loopholes in which they believe there still might be a denial of this help. 
The President. Yes, yes. They have to know that we mean it and that we're going to help the contras. 
The President. Well, I think this is something that you have to look at if such a time should come. But I'm pleased that those men who are most familiar with the resources of the contras have that feeling. They are acquainted with their ability. There is no question that when we were able to give them some help, the contras were giving the Sandinista forces great problems. But you've got to remember that for the last couple of years, other than the humanitarian aid, they were shut off. And that's why they're so limited in the numbers. They've got a potential force of around 25,000. There are about 6,000 now fighting in Nicaragua. But this is a matter of the lack of arms and munitions. 
The President. I would—yes, I think it would be foolish to commit yourself to anything of that kind because this, too, then could stiffen the Sandinistas' resistance and say all we have to do is hold out for 18 months. 
The President. Well, here's the thing everyone is overlooking. Here is this third Communist—well, let—I can't call it an attempt. Here would be the third of the bases that they had established, the Communist bloc, and the first one on our mainland. And they, themselves, have made it plain that they're part of the expansionist philosophy, that Marxian philosophy and belief of a one-world Communist state. Now, what you have to say is, if we do nothing and this is allowed to grow and expand and carry its revolution across other borders, then the threat would remain that there would come a day when their hostilities would be directed at our own interests. And that is the time in which you could say that, yes, then American forces would be involved because the hostilities were directed at us. I don't see it, as some interpret it, that, well, we're leaving the door open; that we may still use troops down there. I don't think we'd have a friend left in Latin America if we used American forces. The image of the great colossus of the North is still too much in their minds. The contras don't want us. They want our help, they want the tools. They've made it plain; they will furnish the manpower. So when I said three, I noticed you kind of paused and looked at each other there. 
Let me point out something that everyone is neglecting up there on the Hill to pay attention to. When we, in the Grenada operation, got possession of all those documents, as well as the arms and the weapons that were already installed in Grenada by the Soviet bloc, we got documents from the Soviet Government, from the Cuban Government addressed to the Communists there in Grenada. And over and over again they referred to that they had Cuba, they had Nicaragua, they had Grenada, and then they went on to discuss what the future goals were and the other targets there in Central America and the Caribbean. So that there was no question about this being a target for Soviet expansionism, using proxies the way they have now with Cuba and all. So the goal is made very plain. Now, this last—again, this threat that a Nicaragua could pose, when I was in Grenada the nine Prime Ministers of the tiny Caribbean island nations unanimously—and they brought it up, I wasn't even discussing this subject. They brought it up to me. They said, "You must continue helping the rebels in Nicaragua because this Nicaragua, under this government, is the greatest threat to our existence, to those nine nations." So, we're not the only ones that see this as a cancer that must be excised. 
The President. Well, because under restrictions that have already been put on us by Congress, we can't give advice, we can't offer training, we can't exchange intelligence information with the contras. And we feel that if we're going to help them with weapons and arms that we ought to be freed of those restrictions and allowed to provide this other assistance to them. 
The President. No, it isn't that as much as it is—well, or whatever the cost might be and being able to give them military intelligence and help with military planning. 
The President. I think we'd have to. This would—then we'd be back to a case similar to the Philippines in which the whole goal of the revolution and of the negotiations would be a government that would be chosen by the people of Nicaragua. Remember that the contras are supporting a guarantee that was given to the Organization of American States of what the revolution against Somoza was supposed to gain. They provided that information to the Organization of American States when they asked the Organization to try and persuade Somoza to step down to end the killing. And he did. But before they asked him to, the Organization asked the revolutionaries to give them what were their revolutionary goals. And they were provided, and the goals were a pluralistic, democratic society, free speech, freedom of religion—all the things that go with democracy. And it was the Sandinistas, as one faction of the revolution, that ousted their fellow revolutionaries when they got control—took over and installed a totalitarian, Communist regime. Now, the contras say what they want is to get back to the original goal which requires letting the people of that country make the decisions to how they want to be governed. 


Remarks at an Exhibit of Weapons Captured in Central America 
March 13, 1986

These captured weapons, the vivid description of subversive activity, and the portrayal of repression that was provided here—all of these are proof of Sandinista crimes against their neighbors and against the people of Nicaragua. These weapons and the testimony that we've seen and heard demonstrate the magnitude of a sophisticated Communist effort to undermine democracy in this hemisphere and to deceive us in the process. These rifles, land mines, grenade launchers, and other weapons did not just miraculously appear in the hands of Communists in El Salvador or the M-19 terrorists in Colombia. They were placed in the hands of those who would eliminate liberty, wreak economic havoc, and destroy democracy by forces opposed to our very way of life. 
The regime which has built—now, I was going to say 9, but now I've been corrected, it is 10—new prisons in Nicaragua and runs drugs to poison our children is backed by an extraordinary support network of international Communists. One doesn't need to be of a particular party or even privy to secret information to see what's happening in Central America. It's clear: Nicaraguan Communists are using their country as a staging area for aggression against their neighbors, while totally subjugating their own people. Their campaign of internal repression and external aggression is being aided and abetted by the Soviet Union, Cuba, East Germany, Bulgaria, Iran, Vietnam, Libya, and other radical states, movements, and organizations. 
The fledgling democracies of Central America cannot be expected to stand alone against this kind of concerted, international Communist effort. And let's make no mistake-this nation, too, is threatened. If we do not act now to counter this subversive aggression by helping the brave men and women of the Nicaraguan democratic resistance, Americans will, in the not too distant future, look to the south and see a string of anti-American Communist dictatorships. And if that happens, it'll do no good to ask who's to blame. It will be an irreparable disaster. And that's why I'm asking the Congress to set aside partisan politics and act now to protect our national security by helping those who want a democratic outcome in Nicaragua. 
America needs to hear the testimony of individuals like the ones we have with us today—men who were on the inside on the other side. Senor Romero was a former rebel commandante in El Salvador. He offers firsthand knowledge of the vicious crime the Communist regime in Managua is perpetrating on the people of El Salvador. Alvaro Baldizon, a former member of Nicaragua's state security forces, was sickened and disillusioned by the brutality, repression, and the shroud of lies in which the Communists draped themselves. And Senor Archibald who was tortured and jailed-these three are only a few of the many who deserve to be heard by decisionmakers. I would hope that all Members of Congress who have not had a chance to hear their message or have not seen this display will take the time to do so. And the display will be on Capitol Hill next week. 
What we heard from these brave men also confirms that the Communists have surrounded their aggression and internal repression with a well-managed campaign of lies, distortion, and—just as we've been told here—disinformation. The masters of deceit have outdone themselves, but Americans can and will see through this smoke screen. The Communist goal is to paralyze us, to prevent us from doing what is necessary to save Central America; but they will not succeed. Ultimately, in a free society the truth will be heard. And today I think we've got before us some facts that the American people need very much to hear. And I hope that all of you will make it a point to spread the word. The stakes are too high to sit this one out


Remarks to Elected Officials During a White House Briefing on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 14, 1986

One of the reasons that we've asked you here is that we know you're influential back home. You're community leaders, and your words and views are respected. We're hoping to win your support on the question of Central America, because we know that'll help us in the support of Congress. I know you came here knowing a lot about what's going on in Nicaragua, and our previous speakers here have never been known for being shy about presenting the facts. There's probably no one in this country who knows more about the realities of what's happening in Central America than Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick and Elliott Abrams. 
What I want to do today is simply address some of the questions that people have about the freedom fighters, the so-called contras. A lot of people who support the contras never call them contras, by the way, because contra is short for counterrevolutionary. And counterrevolutionary used to mean pro-Somoza; it was a Sandinista insult. By the way I see it, Somoza has been gone a long time. The revolution that toppled him then became a Communist coup, and so the contras, so-called, are against it. So, I guess in a way they are counterrevolutionary, and God bless them for being that way. And I guess that makes them contras and so it makes me a contra, too. I bet you're glad I cleared that all up for you. [Laughter] 
But they're fighting for freedom, and all of this has to do with my first point. I'll call it slander number one: the charge that the contras are former members of Somoza's national guard, who were fighting to restore a dictatorship. Well, the truth is all three leaders of the contras—Adolpho Calero, Alfonso Robelo, and Arturo Cruz—fought against Somoza. Calero and Cruz were imprisoned by Somoza. These men aren't fighting the Sandinistas because they're Somozistas. They're fighting the Sandinistas because they're patriots; they're fighting for the only true revolutionary idea of the latter part of the 20th century, and that is democracy. As for the contra troops, well, the average age of the freedom fighters is about 20. So, a lot of these soldiers were 13 years old when Somoza fell. And they're supposed to have been in the national guard—his troops; I don't think they were. 
Slander number two: The U.S. is only picking on the Sandinistas because, well, because we're cultural imperialists. And who are we, anyway, to judge their form of government? Well, you mostly hear this sort of thing from the "Blame America Firsters." Now, it happens to be famously true that our feelings towards democracy are much like Churchill's when he pointed out that democracy is the worst form of government except for all those other forms that have been tried before from time to time. But we're not supporting democracy for, well, should I call it merely idealistic reasons. We're trying to build and strengthen democracy in Central America because democracy brings peace and communism brings war. So, you see, we're motivated by some very practical considerations. Democracies bring peace because democratic governments serve at the will of the people. And it's very hard to convince people-mothers and fathers—to send their sons off to war. 
Communist governments, on the other hand, exert almost total control over the people of their society, from the state-run media that gives them nothing but propaganda to the secret police that drag their sons away in the night. It's not hard for them to wage war. And their whole reason for being is to spread the revolution, to strike ultimately at the very heart of the West. And that's what the Sandinistas mean to do. They're players in a drama whose aim is to spread communism throughout this hemisphere. They can't do it peacefully because almost nobody wants the product they're pushing, so they have to do it violently. Overt, covert, guerrilla warfare, terrorist campaigns, disinformation—they'll do what they have to. But they're not operating independently. They're just part of the new mob, part of the 20th century's answer to Murder Incorporated. 
I have to tell you right here, I have been collecting stories that I can absolutely establish are told by the people behind the Iron Curtain, in the Communist bloc. And they're stories that reveal their kind of cynicism about the system under which they live. And one of the more recent ones that I heard was about the man walking along the street at night in Moscow. A Soviet soldier called for him to halt. He started to run; the soldier shot him. And another man said, "Why did you do that? .... Well," he said, "curfew." "Well," he said, "it isn't curfew yet." He said, "I know. He's a friend of mine. I know where he lives. He couldn't have made it." [Laughter] 
Slander number three: This is the one that the contras will never stop the Sandinistas. Well, talk about self-fulfilling prophecies. Yes, if we give the contras no help, if we send them out there to fight with carbines that last saw action in the Korean war, if we give them nothing but a pat on the back and a roll of bandages, yes, they'll probably lose. And the people who refused to help them will sit back and say, "See, we always said they were losers." Well, the truth is there are over 20,000 freedom fighters who are desperately waiting for everything from shoes to ammunition. And when they get them, they'll move. And when they move, they'll win. 
I think we should ask ourselves one question: Why is it that the Communists have had to engage in the forcible relocation of at least 80,000 Nicaraguans—a campaign that has included the burning of the peasants' homes, the destruction of farms, and the placing of the Miskito Indians in detention camps? Why have they done this? To discourage the general population from giving aid and assistance to the freedom fighters. These freedom fighters are popular with the people because the people, like the revolution they once supported, have been betrayed by the Sandinistas. I think what we're starting to realize is that the Sandinistas are increasingly aware of their-or afraid of their own people. 
Slander number four: The U.S. never gave the Sandinistas a chance, and that is why they turned out so bad. Well, there is some truth in this. We didn't give them a chance—we gave them about a million chances. I won't repeat the whole sad history here, but I do want to address the issue of talking to the Sandinistas at the peace table. We've tried to do it. We've encouraged the Contadora process. We've tried to resolve this question through negotiations, and we're still trying. And the Sandinistas have not been interested in talking seriously and sincerely. All of a sudden, now their apologists come out and say, "Oh, itistime to give new talks a chance." Well, that sounds just fine and peaceful and nonharmful; but what some people don't seem to understand is that if we delay aid for a few months while we're talking, the Sandinistas will take that time and use it to finish off the contras. That's the Communist strategy-to kill them off. And when the execution is complete, they'll end the talks. 
I ask you one question: Have you ever in your reading of history heard of a Communist regime that just couldn't wait to negotiate itself into a democracy? I'm afraid it's a little like a skunk negotiating itself into a rose; it doesn't happen a lot. [Laughter] I shouldn't, I know, but that does trigger another one of those stories I've picked up from over there. They came to General Secretary Gorbachev, and they told him there was a woman in the Kremlin and she wouldn't leave unless she could see him. So, he said, "Well, bring her in." And they brought her in. And he said, "Old mother, what is it?" She said, "I have a question." And he said, "All right." She said, "Was communism invented by a politician or a scientist? .... Well," he said, "a politician." She said, "That explains it. The scientist would have tried it on mice first." [Laughter] 
But I believe the truth is obvious. The Sandinistas will come to the negotiating table only when they see the carrot of peaceful settlement backed up by the stick of a well-equipped armed opposition. And nothing is as urgent as the question of Nicaragua. There is no question that faces this administration, there's no question, I think, that faces our times, that is more crucial to our future than what happens in Central America. And this is the time to help. You've heard the saying over and over again, the cliche, '"Time is everything." Well, in this case, it's true. If we help now, we can literally turn the situation around and change the future. If we fail now, I think we guarantee untold problems for the people of Central America and for our own children. 
When I was a young man back in the 1930's, a war was simmering in Europe. England was imperiled, and its great leader looked across the sea to us for hope. Churchill asked for military assistance. He said, "If you give us the tools, then we'll do the job." And we gave them the tools, to our everlasting credit. I think all of us—or some of us—can still remember Lend Lease and the destroyers and so forth on their way across the ocean. 
Today Adolpho Calero, Alfonso Robelo, and Arturo Cruz look to us for hope, and we must help them. History will know what we did, and it will know what we didn't do. And history will judge. I've made my position clear. I need your help as much as the contras need our help. I need for the Congress to know that you want to help the freedom fighters. I am talking to them constantly, and they're telling me more and more of the people that they're hearing from back home who don't want us to do this. But there's been a great and very sophisticated disinformation program abroad, including high-priced lobbyists here in Washington, all working for the Sandinista cause, and all portraying them as the good guys in this particular fight. 
Well, yesterday, over at the State Department, I stood with three men, all of them veterans from the south. One had been a Communist guerrilla against the El Salvador democracy and couldn't stomach what was going on and what he saw and switched. He was there, and he spoke to the group that was assembled. And another one was there who had been in the Sandinista government, and he spoke. And he told about this disinformation program and the things of that kind. And the third, he was what they called a Creole there—they're blacks and Indians. And they were just simply attacked for being what they are when the Sandinistas came in. And he held up his hands. When they jailed him, they pulled all his fingernails out. And he told of the things that he had seen. 
And then there was a display of the weapons that have been furnished by Nicaragua's Sandinista government to countries all over Latin America—not to the nations or governments, to the Communist guerrillas in each one of those countries that are there trying to overthrow those democracies. If you care—I know—if you care, we'll win. And if we don't care, we'll lose. It's that simple. It's up to us. So, please help us get this across to the Congress. We're not asking for American boys to go down there. There's been no appeal for them. They've told us to the contrary. They don't want them; they don't need them. They just need the tools that we can provide for them as once Churchill asked for tools for their people. And that's what we're asking the Congress to do, to enable us to give those tools to those freedom fighters. So, help us. And thank you, and God bless you


Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Nicaragua 
March 15, 1986

I'd like to speak to you this afternoon about a grave threat to our country and continent: the Communist regime in Nicaragua, a nation closer to our own southern border than Washington is to Kansas City. When the pro-Soviet regime took power in Nicaragua in 1979, it claimed to embrace the highest ideals of individual liberty and promised to hold free elections. What happened? Well, not democracy, but internal repression, imprisonment, and torture, the buildup of an army and militia of more than 120,000, and subversion throughout Central America. 
Today Communist Nicaragua endangers our national security, it threatens our Caribbean sealanes, and still worse, it is intent on bringing the nations of Central America under Communist domination one by one-a grim achievement that would send millions of refugees flooding into our Southern States. Yet grave as it is, this threat can be averted. The Congress now has before it legislation that would send help to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters, the more than 20,000 brave men and women struggling against the Communists who now control their country. This aid could enable the freedom fighters to reclaim Nicaragua for liberty and the West. 
Tomorrow evening I'll discuss in full our proposal to aid the freedom fighters in a televised address from the Oval Office. For now, however, permit me to consider a single but central question: Why, many have asked, must we send the freedom fighters weapons? Why not try to achieve our objectives by negotiating with the Nicaraguan Communists instead'.) Well, the answer is simple: We've tried again and again. Since 1983 I have appointed three Special Envoys to Central America. These envoys have made 48 trips to the region, eager to engage in a serious dialog. Since June 1984 we have held not 1 but 10 high-level meetings with representatives of the Nicaraguan Communists. Each time we left empty-handed. Just yesterday my Special Envoy, Philip Habib, returned from a 49th trip to Central America. 
Other free nations, too, have attempted to engage the Sandinistas in good-faith negotiations. We have yet to see any concrete results. Nicaragua has indeed participated in the Contadora talks—talks sponsored by Mexico, Panama, Colombia, and Venezuela—only to balk any time agreements seem near. Last November, President Ortega said of a document his own representatives had helped to shape, and I quote, "The peace document that the Contadora group submitted in September 1985 is unacceptable to Nicaragua." Well, recently the democratically elected President of El Salvador, Jose Napoleon Duarte, made a new and dramatic offer. If the Communists in Nicaragua agree to church-negotiated talks with their democratic opponents, President Duarte said then he would simultaneously agree to negotiate with the Soviet- and Nicaraguan-backed guerrillas in his country. Both the Nicaraguan Communists and the Salvadoran guerrillas whom they support rejected this offer. 
Failed attempts by El Salvador and the Contadora group, rebuffed attempts on our part. By now the truth about negotiating with the Nicaragua Communists must be abundantly clear. Yes, the Communists might meet their opponents at the table, but only when they fear meeting them in the field. In the meantime, as recent revelations make clear, the Communists are only tightening their grip on Nicaragua. Somoza, the dictator the Sandinistas overthrew, had I prison; the Sandinistas have at least 10 new gulags. And new intelligence shows that Tomas Borge, the Communist Interior Minister, is engaging in a brutal campaign to bring the freedom fighters into discredit. You see, Borge's Communist operatives dress in freedom fighters' uniforms, go into the countryside, then murder and mutilate ordinary Nicaraguans. 
This, then, is why I'm asking the Congress to provide the Nicaraguan freedom fighters not only with much needed humanitarian aid but with military supplies. They must be given the means to fight back. The freedom fighters seek not to destroy their Communist opponents but to liberate their country. Democracy—this is all the freedom fighters ask. And all we're asking for is a democratic outcome, because a democratic Central America is vital to the security of our continent and nation. Now that negotiations with the Nicaraguan Communists have failed again and again, the time has come for Congress to give the freedom fighters what they need for their struggle for democracy to succeed


Address to the Nation on the Situation in Nicaragua 
March 16, 1986

I must speak to you tonight about a mounting danger in Central America that threatens the security of the United States. This danger will not go away; it will grow worse, much worse, if we fail to takeaction now. I'm speaking of Nicaragua, a Soviet ally on the American mainland only 2 hours' flying time from our own borders. With over a billion dollars in Soviet-bloc aid, the Communist government of Nicaragua has launched a campaign to subvert and topple its democratic neighbors. Using Nicaragua as a base, the Soviets and Cubans can become the dominant power in the crucial corridor between North and South America. Established there, they will be in a position to threaten the Panama Canal, interdict our vital Caribbean sealanes, and, ultimately, move against Mexico. Should that happen, desperate Latin peoples by the millions would begin fleeing north into the cities of the southern United States or to wherever some hope of freedom remained. 
The United States Congress has before it a proposal to help stop this threat. The legislation is an aid package of $100 million for the more than 20,000 freedom fighters struggling to bring democracy to their country and eliminate this Communist menace at its source. But this $100 million is not an additional 100 million. We're not asking for a single dime in new money. We are asking only to be permitted to switch a small part of our present defense budget to the defense of our own southern frontier. 
Gathered in Nicaragua already are thousands of Cuban military advisers, contingents of Soviets and East Germans, and all the elements of international terror—from the PLO to Italy's Red Brigades. Why are they there? Because as Colonel Qadhafi has publicly exulted: "Nicaragua means a great thing: it means fighting America near its borders, fighting America at its doorstep." 
For our own security, the United States must deny the Soviet Union a beachhead in North America. But let me make one thing plain: I'm not talking about American troops. They are not needed; they have not been requested. The democratic resistance fighting in Nicaragua is only asking America for the supplies and support to save their own country from communism. The question the Congress of the United States will now answer is a simple one: Will we give the Nicaraguan democratic resistance the means to recapture their betrayed revolution, or will we turn our backs and ignore the malignancy in Managua until it spreads and becomes a mortal threat to the entire New World? Will we permit the Soviet Union to put a second Cuba, a second Libya, right on the doorstep of the United States? 
How can such a small country pose such a great threat? Well, it is not Nicaragua alone that threatens us, but those using Nicaragua as a privileged sanctuary for their struggle against the United States. Their first target is Nicaragua's neighbors. With an army and militia of 120,000 men, backed by more than 3,000 Cuban military advisers, Nicaragua's Armed Forces are the largest Central America has ever seen. The Nicaraguan military machine is more powerful than all its neighbors combined. 
This map—[indicating]—represents much of the Western Hemisphere. Now, let me show you the countries in Central America where weapons supplied by Nicaraguan Communists have been found: Honduras, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala. Radicals from Panama to the south have been trained in Nicaragua, but the Sandinista revolutionary reach extends well beyond their immediate neighbors. In South America and the Caribbean, the Nicaraguan Communists have provided support in the form of military training, safe haven, communications, false documents, safe transit, and, sometimes, weapons to radicals from the following countries: Colombia, Ecuador, Brazil, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, and the Dominican Republic. Even that is not all, for there was an old Communist slogan that the Sandinistas have made clear they honor: The road to victory goes through Mexico. 
If maps, statistics, and facts aren't persuasive enough, we have the words of the Sandinistas and Soviets themselves. One of the highest level Sandinista leaders was asked by an American magazine whether their Communist revolution will, and I quote, "be exported to El Salvador, then Guatemala, then Honduras, and then Mexico." He responded, "That is one historical prophecy of Ronald Reagan that is absolutely true." 
Well, the Soviets have been no less candid. A few years ago, then-Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko noted that Central America was, quote, "boiling like a cauldron" and ripe for revolution. In a Moscow meeting in 1983, Soviet Chief of Staff Marshal Ogarkov declared: "Over two decades, there are Nicaragua"—I should say, "there was only Cuba in Latin America. Today there are Nicaragua, Grenada, and a serious battle is going on in El Salvador." But we don't need their quotes; the American forces who liberated Grenada captured thousands of documents that demonstrated Soviet intent to bring Communist revolution home to the Western Hemisphere. 
So, we're clear on the intentions of the Sandinistas and those who back them. Let us be equally clear about the nature of their regime. To begin with, the Sandinistas have revoked the civil liberties of the Nicaraguan people, depriving them of any legal right to speak, to publish, to assemble, or to worship freely. Independent newspapers have been shut down. There is no longer any independent labor movement in Nicaragua nor any right to strike. As AFL-CIO leader Lane Kirkland has said, "Nicaragua's headlong rush into the totalitarian camp cannot be denied by anyone who has eyes to see." 
Well, like Communist governments everywhere, the Sandinistas have launched assaults against ethnic and religious groups. The capital's only synagogue was desecrated and firebombed—the entire Jewish community forced to flee Nicaragua. Protestant Bible meetings have been broken up by raids, by mob violence, by machineguns. The Catholic Church has been singled out; priests have been expelled from the country, Catholics beaten in the streets after attending mass. The Catholic primate of Nicaragua, Cardinal Obando y Bravo, has put the matter forthrightly. "We want to state clearly," he says, "that this government is totalitarian. We are dealing with an enemy of the Church." 
Evangelical pastor Prudencio Baltodano found out he was on a Sandinista hit list when an army patrol asked his name. "You don't know what we do to the evangelical pastors. We don't believe in God," they told him. Pastor Baltodano was tied to a tree, struck in the forehead with a rifle butt, stabbed in the neck with a bayonet; finally, his ears were cut off, and he was left for dead. "See if your God will save you," they mocked. Well, God did have other plans for Pastor Baltodano. He lived to tell the world his story—to tell it, among other places, right here in the White House. 
I could go on about this nightmare—the black lists, the secret prisons, the Sandinista-directed mob violence. But as if all this brutality at home were not enough, the Sandinistas are transforming their nation into a safe house, a command post for international terror. The Sandinistas not only sponsor terror in El Salvador, Costa Rica, Guatemala, and Honduras—terror that led last summer to the murder of four U.S. marines in a care in San Salvador—they provide a sanctuary for terror. Italy has charged Nicaragua with harboring their worst terrorists, the Red Brigades. 
The Sandinistas have even involved themselves in the international drug trade. I know every American parent concerned about the drug problem will be outraged to learn that top Nicaraguan Government officials are deeply involved in drug trafficking. This picture—[indicating]—secretly taken at a military airfield outside Managua, shows Federico Vaughn, a top aide to one of the nine commandantes who rule Nicaragua, loading an aircraft with illegal narcotics, bound for the United States. No, there seems to be no crime to which the Sandinistas will not stoop; this is an outlaw regime. 
If we return for a moment to our map, it becomes clear why having this regime in Central America imperils our vital security interests. Through this crucial part of the Western Hemisphere passes almost half our foreign trade, more than half our imports of crude oil, and a significant portion of the military supplies we would have to send to the NATO alliance in the event of a crisis. These are the chokepoints where the sealanes could be closed. Central America is strategic to our Western alliance, a fact always understood by foreign enemies. In World War II only a few German U-boats, operating from bases 4,000 miles away in Germany and occupied Europe, inflicted crippling losses on U.S. shipping right off our southern coast. Today Warsaw Pact engineers are building a deep water port on Nicaragua's Caribbean coast, similar to the naval base in Cuba for Soviet-built submarines. They are also constructing, outside Managua, the largest military airfield in Central America—similar to those in Cuba, from which Russian Bear Bombers patrol the U.S. east coast from Maine to Florida. 
How did this menace to the peace and security of our Latin neighbors, and ultimately ourselves, suddenly emerge? Let me give you a brief history. In 1979 the people of Nicaragua rose up and overthrew a corrupt dictatorship. At first the revolutionary leaders promised free elections and respect for human rights. But among them was an organization called the Sandinistas. Theirs was a Communist organization, and their support of the revolutionary goals was sheer deceit. Quickly and ruthlessly, they took complete control. 
Two months after the revolution, the Sandinista leadership met in secret and, in what came to be known as the "72-hour Document," described themselves as the vanguard of a revolution that would sweep Central America, Latin America, and finally, the world. Their true enemy, they declared: the United States. Rather than make this document public, they followed the advice of Fidel Castro, who told them to put on a facade of democracy. While Castro viewed the democratic elements in Nicaragua with contempt, he urged his Nicaraguan friends to keep some of them in their coalition, in minor posts, as window dressing to deceive the West. "And that way," Castro said, "you can have your revolution and the Americans will pay for it." And we did pay for it. More aid flowed to Nicaragua from the United States in the first 18 months under the Sandinistas than from any other country. Only when the mask fell, and the face of totalitarianism became visible to the world, did the aid stop. 
Confronted with this emerging threat, early in our administration I went to Congress and with bipartisan support managed to get help for the nations surrounding Nicaragua. Some of you may remember the inspiring scene when the people of El Salvador braved the threats and gunfire of Communist guerrillas, guerrillas directed and supplied from Nicaragua, and went to the polls to vote decisively for democracy. For the Communists in El Salvador, it was a humiliating defeat. But there was another factor the Communists never counted on, a factor that now promises to give freedom a second chance—the freedom fighters of Nicaragua. 
You see, when the Sandinistas betrayed the revolution, many who had fought the old Somoza dictatorship literally took to the hills and, like the French Resistance that fought the Nazis, began fighting the Sovietbloc Communists and their Nicaraguan collaborators. These few have now been joined by thousands. With their blood and courage, the freedom fighters of Nicaragua have pinned down the Sandinista army and bought the people of Central America precious time. We Americans owe them a debt of gratitude. In helping to thwart the Sandinistas and their Soviet mentors, the resistance has contributed directly to the security of the United States. 
Since its inception in 1982 the democratic resistance has grown dramatically in strength. Today it numbers more than 20,000 volunteers, and more come every day. But now the freedom fighters' supplies are running short, and they are virtually defenseless against the helicopter gunships Moscow has sent to Managua. Now comes the crucial test for the Congress of the United States. Will they provide the assistance the freedom fighters need to deal with Russian tanks and gunships, or will they abandon the democratic resistance to its Communist enemy? 
In answering that question, I hope Congress will reflect deeply upon what it is the resistance is fighting against in Nicaragua. Ask yourselves: What in the world are Soviets, East Germans, Bulgarians, North Koreans, Cubans, and terrorists from the PLO and the Red Brigades doing in our hemisphere, camped on our own doorstep? Is that for peace? Why have the Soviets invested $600 million to build Nicaragua into an armed force almost the size of Mexico's, a country 15 times as large and 25 times as populous. Is that for peace? Why did Nicaragua's dictator, Daniel Ortega, go to the Communist Party Congress in Havana and endorse Castro's callfor the worldwide triumph of communism? Was that for peace? 
Some Members of Congress ask me, why notnegotiate? That's a good question, and let me answer it directly. We have sought, and still seek, a negotiated peace and a democratic future in a free Nicaragua. Ten times we have met and tried to reason with the Sandinistas; 10 times we were rebuffed. Last year we endorsed church-mediated negotiations between the regime and the resistance. The Soviets and the Sandinistas responded with a rapid arms buildup of mortars, tanks, artillery, and helicopter gunships. 
Clearly, the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact have grasped the great stakes involved, the strategic importance of Nicaragua. The Soviets have made their decision-to support the Communists. Fidel Castro has made his decision—to support the Communists. Arafat, Qadhafi, and the Ayatollah Khomeini have made their decision—to support the Communists. Now we must make our decision. With Congress' help, we can prevent an outcome deeply injurious to the national security of the United States. If we fail, there will be no evading responsibility-history will hold us accountable. This is not some narrow partisan issue; it is a national security issue, an issue on which we mustact not as Republicans, not as Democrats, but as Americans. 
Forty years ago Republicans and Democrats joined together behind the Truman doctrine. It must be our policy, Harry Truman declared, to support peoples struggling to preserve their freedom. Under that doctrine, Congress sent aid to Greece just in time to save that country from the closing grip of a Communist tyranny. We saved freedom in Greece then. And with that same bipartisan spirit, we can save freedom in Nicaragua today. Over the coming days I will continue the dialog with Members of Congress—talking to them, listening to them, hearing out their concerns. Senator Scoop Jackson, who led the fight on Capitol Hill for an awareness of the danger in Central America, said it best: "On matters of national security, the best politics is no politics." 
You know, recently one of our most distinguished Americans, Clare Boothe Luce, had this to say about the coming vote: "In considering this crisis," Mrs. Luce said, "my mind goes back to a similar moment in our history—back to the first years after Cuba had fallen to Fidel. One day during those years, I had lunch at the White House with a man I had known since he was a boy, John F. Kennedy. 'Mr. President,' I said, 'no matter how exalted or great a man may be, history will have time to give him no more than one sentence. George Washington, he founded our country. Abraham Lincoln, he freed the slaves and preserved the Union. Winston Churchill, he saved Europe.' 'And what, Clare,' John Kennedy said, 'do you believe my sentence will be?' 'Mr. President,' she answered, 'your sentence will be that you stopped the Communists—or that you did not.'" 
Well, tragically, John Kennedy never had the chance to decide which that would be. Now leaders of our own time must do so. My fellow Americans, you know where I stand. The Soviets and the Sandinistas must notbepermitted to crush freedom in Central America and threaten our own security on our own doorstep. Now the Congress must decide where it stands. Mrs. Luce ended by saying: "Only this is certain. Through all time to come, this, the 99th Congress of the United States, will be remembered as that body of men and women that either stopped the Communists before it was too late—or did not." 
So, tonight I ask you to do what you've done so often in the past. Get in touch with your Representative and Senators and urge them to vote yes; tell them to help the freedom fighters. Help us prevent a Communist takeover of Central America. 
I have only 3 years left to serve my country; 3 years to carry out the responsibilities you entrusted to me; 3 years to work for peace. Could there be any greater tragedy than for us to sit back and permit this cancer to spread, leaving my successor to face far more agonizing decisions in the years ahead? The freedom fighters seek a political solution. They are willing to lay down their arms and negotiate to restore the original goals of the revolution, a democracy in which the people of Nicaragua choose their own government. That is our goal also, but it can only come about if the democratic resistance is able to bring pressure to bear on those who have seized power. 
We still have time to do what must be done so history will say of us: We had the vision, the courage, and good sense to come together and act—Republicans and Democrats—when the price was not high and the risks were not great. We left America safe, we left America secure, we left America free—still a beacon of hope to mankind, still a light unto the nations.
Thank you, and God bless you. 


Informal Exchange With Reporters Prior to a Meeting With Ambassador Philip C. Habib, Special Envoy for Central America 
March 17, 1986

The President. Takes one to know one. 
The President. I'm not going to respond to remarks from him. 

Remarks at a White House Reception for Private Sector Supporters of United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 21, 1986

The President. Well, thank you very much for a very heartwarming welcome. And I want you to know I'm an honorary member [of the contras]. For those of you who are too far, I'm sure you're familiar with it. "If you like Cuba, you'll love Nicaragua." [Laughter] 
Well, thank you, and welcome you to the White House. And I want to express my personal thanks and the gratitude of the American people for the hard work and dedication that you are all giving this freedom struggle. Perhaps never before on a foreign policy issue have we seen such a broad-based coalition. In the audience today, we have Christians and Jews, veterans and businessmen, ethnic and minority groups. You've all come together in a noble cause. Unfortunately for America, that cause, the cause of freedom and hope and democracy, suffered a temporary setback yesterday in the House of Representatives. I underline "temporary." History will record yesterday's vote as wrong, tragically wrong. But let me assure these brave men here today —[contra leaders] Adolpho Calero, Alfonso Robelo, .Arturo Cruz—America will not desert you and your courageous struggle to expel Communist tyranny from the American mainland. 
You know, to paraphrase another famous freedom fighter, John Paul Jones: We have not yet begun to fight. You know, I don't mean to be kind of sacrilegious about things like this, but there was a joke that was born in recent years out of that line of John Paul Jones' in the American Revolution. And it kind of fits what happened with some people yesterday. The joke has it that when he said this, the deck of his ship was covered with dead sailors and—or wounded and dead sailors and marines. And when he said that, one of the wounded raised up on his elbow and says, "There's always one character that didn't get the message." [Laughter] 
Well, the Senate will be voting on our age package—or aid package— [laughter] -in a few days. That first word kind of sticks with me. [Laughter] And we intend to bring this back to the House as many times as it takes to win. And we will win. But time is of the essence. Every day that passes, the freedom fighters of Nicaragua are left to face Soviet helicopter gunships with hand-held rifles. How can we allow that to continue? If this vote is not quickly reversed, we will be sending a message to the world that the United States of America won't lift a finger for freedom, that we care less about defending democracy than the Soviet Union cares about destroying it. We'll be giving a green light to Soviet expansionism on the American mainland and inviting the worldwide terrorist network to set up shop on our own continent. 
Well, Qadhafi has boasted of his intention to fight America, quote, "at its doorstep." Well, the Nicaraguan Communists have threatened to carry their revolution into the United States itself. The Soviet Union is pouring billions of dollars into Latin America with one purpose: to subvert the democracies of Central America and ring the United States with a noose of hostile, Communist states. Soon, it will be too late for excuses. 
The question now is: Will we reverse this tragic course before it is too late? Will we support freedom while the price is still not too high and the risks are still not too great? And the answer will be, and the answer must be, yes. There's simply no more important foreign policy question before the United States Congress today. We cannot give up. We will never give up. The Communists are pressing their offensive against the freedom fighters along the Honduran border. No doubt they'll be emboldened by yesterday's vote in the House and will try to seriously damage the freedom fighters before aid can arrive. And we can't let that happen. We can't let the final hope of freedom in Nicaragua be extinguished while Congress slowly makes up its mind to do theright thing. 
Alfonso, Adolpho, and Arturo, would you kind of come up here and stand by my side? I want to tell you something: We're in this together. The future of Central America is not with communism; the future of Central America is with democracy and all those who are fighting for freedom. You are the future of Central America. Today I give you my solemn pledge: I will not rest until freedom is given a fighting chance in Nicaragua. We'll spare no effort and give no ground in supporting the democratic resistance in Nicaragua. Until these men are successful in their freedom struggle, there'll be no peace in Central America, and there will be no peace in our souls. 


Radio Address to the Nation on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 22, 1986

Last Thursday the House of Representatives voted on a proposal to send aid to the freedom fighters of Nicaragua, the men and women struggling against the Communists who control their country. This proposal was designed to protect our own southern borders and give the freedom fighters the chance to reclaim their nation for liberty. It would've required no new money whatsoever, but would simply have used funds already approved by Congress for defense. By a margin of 12, the House voted no. 
Every day that this vote is permitted to stand, every day that freedom fighters are left defenseless against Soviet helicopter gunships, more lives will be lost, and the dangers will grow from this Soviet beachhead on our continent. Already the Soviets have armed Nicaragua with tanks, antiaircraft missiles, and helicopter gunships. So-called advisers from the Soviet Union, East Germany, and Cuba swarm Nicaragua in the thousands and have helped the Nicaraguan Communists to build an army and militia of 120,000—by far the biggest armed force that Central America has ever seen. 
But that is not all. The Sandinistas have openly admitted that they intend to spread their Communist revolution throughout Latin America. But the Nicaraguan freedom fighters have handed the Communists a setback. Although outnumbered and underequipped, the freedom fighters have pinned down thousands of Sandinista troops and countless military assets. With their blood and courage, they have bought the people of other Central American nations the precious time they need to strengthen their democracies. And, in helping to thwart the aggressive designs of the Nicaraguan Communists and their Soviet-bloc accomplices, they have directly contributed to the safety of the United States and the American people. We owe the freedom fighters a vote of thanks, not a vote of no confidence. I cannotaccept the House action as final, for I cannot believe that it reflects the informed and considered will of the American people. 
Next week the effort to provide aid to the freedom fighters will move to the Senate. Our proposal, as it now stands, including its provision to give the freedom fighters defensive weapons immediately, represents the absolute minimum of assistance to which I can agree. Any less would be too little, any further delay would be too late. We speak not of a game in which one side can call "time out" to consider its options; we speak of a life and death struggle for liberty. The Soviet gunships will not halt their operations while we debate. The House vote must be reversed, and soon. I urge the Senate to vote on the aid program promptly and the House to take the matter up once again as its next item of business. 
Some of our critics insist that even the minimal assistance we're requesting is too much, and negotiations alone are the answer. Well, I must remind them that the Sandinista Communists have already concluded negotiations—in 1979 with the Organization of American States. In that agreement, the Communists promised to conduct a peaceful, nonaligned foreign policy and to hold free elections. They have done neither. 
I must remind our critics that our administration has pursued active diplomacy, holding 10 high-level meetings with the Sandinista regime. Always, the Communists have refused serious negotiations. I must further remind our critics that promising diplomatic proposals were on the table when Thursday's damaging House vote took place. President. Duarte of El Salvador and his Central American colleagues had proposed that a dialog take place simultaneously between the freedom fighters and the Nicaraguan Communists, between the Salvadoran Government and its Communist opponents, and between the Nicaraguan Communists and the United States. We support this initiative, but the Nicaraguan Communists have refused to take part. 
So, I would say to our critics: Join me in providing all the resources necessary—and that means military aid to the freedom fighters—to bring the Nicaraguan Communists to the table and to make them honor the international promise they have already made to the Organization of American States. The Communists, themselves, have shown again and again that diplomacy alone is not enough. As your President, I cannot leave my successor, I cannot leave our children, to face grave dangers and agonizing decisions that with a minimum of foresight and courage could've been averted. The freedom fighters have done much; they ask little. Let us act to help them together, Democrats and Republicans, and let us act now. Then we can get on with the business of lending a hand to our neighbors as they attack poverty and create economic opportunity for their people.

Remarks at a Senate Campaign Fundraiser for Representative W. Henson Moore in New Orleans, Louisiana 
March 27, 1986

In Central America we won military support for the besieged democracy of El Salvador by only a few votes. Had we lost, the tragedy that would have followed would have been a disaster for the people of that country and would have set off a chain of events beyond our control. Many of those who opposed that military aid suggested that Communist victory in El Salvador was inevitable, that our military support was only prolonging the agony. And, again, the opposite was true. Today the Communists are on the run in El Salvador, and even critics believe President Duarte can make democracy in his troubled country. And they have had two fine, fair elections there as a democracy. One of the important factors that has given the people of El Salvador a chance has been the courage of the Nicaraguan democratic resistance. These brave men and women have bogged down the Communist drive in Central America. 
One week ago the House of Representatives voted against assisting these Nicaraguan freedom fighters, and again we see reality turned on its head. At the same time that our opponents claim to support negotiations, they move to eliminate any incentive for the Communists to negotiate. They are not going to come to the table because they have had a change of heart. They are going to come because the heat is on and they get tired of the heat that the contras can impose upon them. Does anyone really believe that the ruling clique that runs Nicaragua will enter into a serious dialog simply to prove they're good guys? One opponent of aid to the freedom fighters was quoted after the vote as saying, "I hope the Sandinistas take it as a sign of peace and friendship." Well, the Nicaraguan Communists took the House vote as a sign all right; they invaded the territory of Honduras with about 1,500 heavily armed troops, and then they lied about it. This military drive demonstrates the nature of the Nicaragua regime. The Communists in Nicaragua are not seeking dialog and persuasion or pluralism. They want total power in their hands, and they have no respect for the borders of their neighbors. This Sandinista offensive is a slap in the face to everyone who voted against aid to the freedom fighters thinking it to be a vote for reconciliation. 
We live in a dangerous world. If peace is to be maintained and if our country is to be secure, we must have the courage to face facts and act. The lives of the Nicaraguan freedom fighters, the fate of Central America, is to a large degree in the hands of the United States Congress. Louisiana's House delegation, demonstrating a bipartisan commitment to our national security, voted 6 to 2 for the freedom fighters that last time around. Louisiana can be proud of that. But last Thursday's House vote will not be the final word on this issue. I hope the Senate will vote today and send the measure back to the House for another vote as quickly as possible, because that's what the Senate is debating as we sit here today.


Radio Address to the Nation on International Violence and Democratic Values 
March 29, 1986

But as if violence in the Mediterranean wasn't enough, we also had word from Central America that forces of the Communist government of Nicaragua, the Sandinistas, invaded the nearby nation of Honduras in an attempt to destroy Nicaraguan freedom fighters, who have taken up refuge there. Once again, the news for the forces of freedom was good. The freedom fighters gave the invading Communists a resounding defeat. Still, it's sad to have to begin this report with such accounts. 
Eastertide for Christians and Passover for Jews are meant to be times of spiritual awareness and a deepening encounter with the Lord and with the Lord's injunction that all nations and peoples of the Earth live in peace and harmony with each other. So, perhaps a word or two is in order on the source of the violence that we've see this week. You see, dictators like those in Libya or in Nicaragua know how unpopular they are with their people. They know how shaky their rule is. They can never really feel secure. And that's why they're afraid of free elections. It's also why they need a secret police and so much armed might to intimidate those they fear most, their own people, to prevent them from even entertaining the hope that democracy will some day come to their own country. And that's why so many dictators have a special fear and hatred for the United States. American power, as long as it is used wisely and justly, is an undying symbol of hope for oppressed peoples around the world


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With the American Society of Newspaper Editors
April 9, 1986

In a curious way, though, being wrong about the issues, whether it's the economy or Central America, doesn't seem to discourage our critics. I'd hardly gotten through my televised address asking support for the freedom fighters in Nicaragua, when some voices were questioning some of the charges I made against the Sandinista regime. For example, that the Sandinistas engaged in vicious acts of anti-Semitism, and that they'd been deeply involved in the illicit drug trade. Well, again, fortunately, some of the doubters were quickly rebutted. The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith quickly issued a strong statement confirming the truth of what we said about the persecution of Jews in Nicaragua. And on the illicit drug-trafficking charge, I was grateful to a number of publications for editorially outlining the depth and extent of the evidence against the Sandinistas. A massive report by the President's Commission on Organized Crime on the international drug trade, for example, discussed the Sandinistas' participation in the drug trade. 
Extremely persuasive testimony has also come from Alvaro Baldizon, the former chief investigator of the special investigations commission of the ministry of interior in Nicaragua. And by the way, besides his descriptions of what he learned about the Sandinistas' involvement in the drug trade, Senor Baldizon's testimony called "Inside the Sandinista Regime: A Special Investigator's Perspective." This is a richly detailed, harrowing look at the Sandinista regime. It's been published by the State Department, and I recommend it to you. I think your readers would be intrigued by his revelations, especially his portrait of Sandinista leaders like Interior Minister Tomas Borge and that gentleman's often successful attempts to mislead visiting dignitaries. 
I hope you'll permit me one other recommendation. Jaime Chamorro, the editor of La Prensa, the heavily censored but last remaining nongovernment newspaper in Managua, recently wrote an article for the Washington Post. He put it quite plainly. He said the Sandinistas are transforming the Nicaraguan revolution, fought for by all Nicaraguans, into a revolution that serves the purposes of Marxism-Leninism. And he went on to say the Sandinistas want to use his country as—and I'm quoting—"a beachhead for Communist expansion." He said they were filling Nicaragua with "internationalists whose aims are the expansion of Communist influence and Soviet domination in the region." And he adds, "When Latin America or much of Latin America is under the influence of the Eastern bloc, NATO will no longer be in Europe; it will be in San Antonio, Texas." You know—he said that. I'm just quoting. [Laughter] 
You know—a number of people here in Washington have said that we can win the support for the freedom fighters only on the strength of the national security issue. Well, I agree with Senor Chamorro that the national security issue is very important; but, you know, sometimes I think Washington people forget that self-interest doesn't really count as much with the American people as it does in this town. But I think you know that over the long run, the American people are a little more enlightened than that; that they respond readily to what's right and what's wrong, what's good and bad, and not just "what's in it for me?" I think that's why support for the freedom fighters is growing in this country. 
The American people are just now getting the facts about the Sandinista regime: its atrocities against groups like the Miskito Indians; its persecution of Jews and Christians; the verbal attacks on Cardinal Obando, whom we intend to prevent from becoming the Cardinal Mindszenty of this hemisphere. And the list goes on. The savageness and inhumanity of this regime is a story that is waiting to be told. 
We know now that the Cubans knew and approved of Sandinista plans for their recent incursion into Honduras and that each day's delay in assisting the freedom fighters increases the chances of a permanent Soviet beachhead of aggression on the North American mainland. The Sandinistas, the Cubans, and the Soviets want a military, not a political, solution to the problem of Central America. And that's why it's imperative for the House of Representatives to approve the legislation recently passed by the Senate, legislation that provides the freedom fighters with our full aid package, especially the defensive weapons they need to protect themselves.
The President. Well, we may disagree on whether it is necessary now to give this, of course—and we do believe it is necessary, and I'm wondering if their view would not be the same about help to the contras in view of what just happened in the last meeting. Because once again and we have subscribed to their goals that they have put down as to what it is they're trying to achieve. And they know that we fully subscribe to them. But in its last meeting, it was Nicaragua, once again, the Sandinista government, that refused the proposals of Contadora and walked out. So, maybe now they'll join us in believing that there's going to have to be some pressure put on the Sandinista government to make it return to the goals of the revolution against the Somoza regime. 
They announced publicly goals and informed the Organization of American States what their revolutionary goals were; and they were democracy, a pluralistic society, freedom of press, religion, freedom of speech, observance of human rights, and theright of the people to choose their own government. And that's what is at issue. The Sandinistas were only part of that revolution. And they ousted their revolutionary companions, who are mainly now the contras. Once the revolution succeeded, they took over and have established a totalitarian Communist state. And we think they're not going to—when have we ever seen a Communist government that has achieved that totalitarian statehood—when have we ever seen them voluntarily and without some pressure or force give up their power? So, we believe that arming the contras is necessary. And I hope maybe now the Contadora will agree with us.


The President's News Conference
April 9, 1986
Second issue is aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. Two events in recent weeks have underscored the urgency of our aid request to the democratic resistance. First, the Nicaraguan Communists sent troops into Honduras on a search-and-destroy mission to kill off the freedom fighters. Second, the Sandinista Communists torpedoed the Contadora talks, talks conducted with 12 other Latin countries who seek peace in the region. And these events demonstrate that the Nicaraguan Communists will never make peace with their neighbors or with their own people unless the pressure on them increases. The Communists must realize that they cannot crush their opponents, and our assistance can ensure that the freedom fighters are not crushed. That assistance will give Nicaraguans a choice, and it will give diplomacy a chance. 
Four out of five Central American countries now have democratic governments; democracies that our bipartisan policies helped to bring about. We must stick to this bipartisan strategy. And this coming week, the House of Representatives will be called upon to maintain that tradition. Action now is essential, and we cannot afford further delay. This proposal must not be held hostage to any other legislation. Through its vote next week, the House can show the world that the United States is determined to defend freedom in Central America. The Soviet Union, Fidel Castro, and the Sandinistas are determined to make the region a Communist enclave. Well, we must not and we will notpermit that to happen.



Remarks at a White House Meeting with the Associated General Contractors of America 
April 14, 1986

I understand that you'll soon be on your way up to the Hill, where many need to hear that message. But right now, there's another message that I'd like to send Congress on an all-important vote—on our resolution to provide aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. The House Democratic leadership plans to place that resolution on to an additional spending bill. And if this happens, the bill could be lost for months in a forest of legislative delays. In other words, even if a majority of House Members vote for aid to the freedom fighters we still wouldn't be able to get the aid to them, and certainly not in time. And we can depend on the Sandinistas to try and destroy them before we got around to it. 
We've had a good, honest debate on this issue. And in this system of ours, if you don't get a majority, you lose. But if you do get a majority, you're supposed to win. That's the American way. Well, we won this vote in the Senate, so I can only say that if aid to the freedom fighters wins a majority of the House, but still loses if the will of Congress is thwarted by subterfuge and back room deals, then those responsible will have served only to damage this nation's foreign policy. If the House votes yes, but aid doesn't go through, or if the House amends our bill to block the defensive weapons the freedom fighters need, there is no question that the lives of countless young Nicaraguans will be put in jeopardy. There's no question that the cause of peace and democracy will be set back. And there is no question that the judgment of history will hand down a verdict of shame on us all. But if enough Republicans and Democrats unite, if in a bipartisan way we stand up and insist on what is right, fair, and just, then there can be a real victory—victory for the cause of democracy, for the cause of peace, and for honor in America. And let's make sure that we act worthy of ourselves. [Applause] 
Thank you very much. And let's make sure that this government acts worthy of the American people. That's the message I'd like to send to Congress; so would all those who are putting their lives—so would all those, I should say, that are putting their lives on the line so that they, like we, may be able to feel free someday. I know that I've done a lot of talking about this, and I know that there've been people who've taken me on for my speech on television and indicated that some of the things I said weren't true. The Sandinista government has, as is typical of Communist-bloc nations, a great disinformation network, highly financed, very effective. And, while every criticism of what I said about the Sandinista government was widely heralded throughout the country and the world, very little attention was given to the repudiation of those critics by authorities in Nicaragua who rode to the rescue and said that what I had told them about the Sandinistas was absolutely true. 
And we have an uphill fight trying to get the people of America to realize that what we're seeing down there is not the overthrow of a legitimate government; the Sandinistas took power at the point of a gun in the revolution to overthrow Somoza. But they were only a part of the revolutionaries. And then, as happens with Communist organizations, they managed to get rid of their other revolutionary allies by execution, by jailing, by exiling them out of the country. The contras are made up of many of those other revolutionaries. And all they're asking is a chance for the people of Nicaragua to have what the revolutionaries promised when they were fighting the Somoza national guard, and that was the chance for the Nicaraguan people by their vote to decide the kind of government they want and who should be in office in their country. And any distortion of that does a great injustice to some people who are risking everything they have to try just for that promise that has never been fulfilled. And, as I say, the Sandinista government is not a duly elected, chosen government; it's a gang that took over by force. So, we think that maybe force on them will cause them, perhaps, to be willing to listen to the will of the people of Nicaragua


Remarks at a White House Meeting With Members of the American Business Conference 
April 15, 1986

Yet let us not underestimate the reach of Qadhafi's terror. He's tried to subvert half a dozen countries on his own continent of Africa and has had Libyan students and dissidents murdered in faraway capitals. And I would remind the House voting this week that this archterrorist has sent $400 million and an arsenal of weapons and advisers into Nicaragua to bring his war home to the United States. He has bragged that he is helping the Nicaraguans because they fight America on its own ground. We do not underestimate the brutality of this evil man, but Colonel Qadhafi ought not to underestimate either the capacity or legitimate anger of a free people.


Remarks. on Signing the Law Day U.S.A. Proclamation 
April 16, 1986

And while I'm on the subject of human rights under law, we cannot forget the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. Those brave men are fighting to establish respect for human rights, for democracy, and for the rule of law within their own country. Today the House of Representatives will cast an historic vote on aid to the freedom fighters. And unfortunately, if that aid is approved, it'll be tied to a pork-barrel appropriations bill, a bill so brimming with waste and excess that aid to the freedom fighters may never see the light of day. If we win a fair up-or-down vote only to see it canceled by the House leadership through a backdoor parliamentary maneuver, then the cause of democracy in Nicaragua and the rule of law will be the greatest casualties. I sincerely hope the obstructionists in Congress will reconsider, because America is watching. I appeal to the sense of fair play of our elected officials in the House. On an issue of such magnitude, let the majority work its will. Let freedom be given a chance in 

Remarks at the Annual White House Correspondents Dinner 
April 17, 1986

It must be exciting, though, being a correspondent in a place where all the political action is. Unfortunately, you're here and the action's in Chicago. [Laughter] Those last few weeks have really been hectic what with Libya, Nicaragua, and the budget and taxes. I don't know about you, but I've been working long hours. I've really been burning the midday oil. [Laughter


Remarks at a Fund-raising Luncheon for Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in New York, New York 
April 18, 1986

We face a direct and explicit military and political challenge in Central America, a challenge involving communism and its ambitions. Al D'Amato and I agree that to protect the peace you have to protect democracy, and that means protecting those who fight for democracy. And I want to thank you, Al, for proving once again the other day when you voted for aid for the Nicaraguan freedom fighters that you can face the hard choices and make the hard votes. I know it isn't easy. But it's better than easy; it's right


Remarks at the Heritage Foundation Anniversary Dinner 
April 22, 1986

Much of this at the time was viewed skeptically. But here we are a few years later; democracy is prospering in many nations where it's never before been seen. In Latin America and the Caribbean alone more than 50—or 90 percent of the people live in nations that are democracies or headed in that direction. What a change from a few years ago. And we've seen the insurgencies in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Nicaragua, Angola, and elsewhere, vivid evidence that the romance of revolution is no longer on the side of the totalitarians. It's telling proof that the eighties is a break with the past, that the eighties is truly the decade of the freedom fighters

So, let me make a prediction. I think there's a growing recognition that the idea of self-government and the commitment to democratic rights is on the march everywhere in the world, and especially in Central America. Those who've been naive about the dangers of communism in the past, those who've been wrong about the nature of Communist regimes in Vietnam, Cambodia, Grenada, and El Salvador are uneasy now with their views on the Sandinistas and the freedom fighters. So, here is my prophecy: We're going to get the freedom fighters the help they need, and we're going to get it to them soon. But it's going to happen because I know you and I are going to redouble our efforts over the next few weeks. 
And let me make one other prediction: We must never forget that totalitarian regimes are as fragile as they are powerful. Time magazine recently did a story on scholar Robert Leiken, who went to Nicaragua and, much to the distress of some of his liberal colleagues, concluded that opposition to the Sandinistas is very deep and very strong in that nation. So, let's remember this, too: The vast majority of the people in Nicaragua want nothing to do with communism or the militarism it engenders. The day is coming when the democratic promises of the revolution of 1979 will be fulfilled and Nicaragua will be free. 
The only point I'm making here is this: We've been talking about the idea of freedom, about expanding its frontiers, since the beginning of this administration. So no one should be surprised that our policies and programs have followed suit. Freedom is on the march; we pledge solidarity to those who seek to make it their own.
And by the way, these two issues we've discussed here this evening—the march of freedom, especially in Central America, and the fight against terrorism—are directly related. In that American Bar Association address, I pointed out the strong ties of the Sandinistas to the international terror network. The Sandinistas have provided refuge for all sorts of international terrorists. Members of the Italian Government have openly charged that Nicaragua is harboring some of Italy's worst terrorists. And we have evidence that in addition to Italy's Red Brigades, other elements of the world's most vicious terrorists groups-West Germany's Baader-Meinhof gang, the Basque ETA, the PLO, and the Tupamaros—have found a haven in Nicaragua. They have actively supported the Salvadoran rebels and have frequently used terror, including the killing of four of our marines in a cafe last summer. And these are the same rebels who celebrated the Challenger explosion and said our astronauts were war criminals and deserved what they got. 
That picture making the rounds showing Daniel Ortega standing with Mu'ammar Qadhafi and raising his fist in a gesture of solidarity is very much to the point. I hope every Member of Congress will reflect on the fact that the Sandinistas have been training, supporting, and directing, as well as sheltering terrorists; and in this sense, they're trying to build a Libya on our doorstep. And it's the contras, the freedom fighters, who are stopping them. So, you see it goes back to what Richard Weaver has said and what Heritage is all about: Ideas do have consequences, rhetoric is policy, and words are action


Remarks to the International Forum of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States 
April 23, 1986

In a few days, Nancy and I, as you've been told, will be heading west, embarking on a journey which will culminate in Tokyo with a summit of the major democracies. And as we liftoff aboard Air Force One, circling half the globe, the winds of freedom will be propelling my mission. Those winds are blowing in Latin America where, in recent years, we've witnessed one of the greatest expansions of democracy in history. Today 90 percent of the population of this hemisphere lives in democratic countries or countries in transition to democracy. In Europe the new, vigorous democracies in Spain and Portugal and the revitalized democratic process in Turkey have proven the pessimists wrong. The democratic workers' movement in Poland—Solidarity—those suffering repression still persists. In Nicaragua, Angola, Afghanistan, and Cambodia freedom fighters struggling for liberty and independence inspire the West with their courage in the face of a powerful enemy. As I fly westward over our majestic land, I go knowing that we're witnessing an awakening to those self-evident truths to which our forefathers pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor


Remarks at the Annual Republican Senate/House Fund-raising Dinner 
May 21, 1986

In foreign affairs we've seen that we can count on the Republican Senate to stand firmly on the side of freedom. Where does the House stand? Unfortunately we can't know, because the Democratic House leadership has twisted the rules so that a fair up or down vote on aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters was not possible. Can we turn our backs on our brothers and sisters to the south and still remain worthy of our own forefathers? Can we renounce the good and worthy ideals for which these Nicaraguan patriots shed their blood and believe their freedom lost there may not one day be lost here as well? Some say, "Yes." I say, "Never." And I say a few words that are not mine; they belong to that immortal Winston Churchill: "We must never give in. Never, never, never." Never, until the people of Nicaragua can live in the full sunlight of freedom and democracy


Remarks Following Discussions With President Jose Simeon Azcona Hoyo of Honduras 
May 27, 1986

Our two governments share a serious concern over the threat to peace, stability, and freedom posed by the Communist regime in Nicaragua. The Nicaraguan Communists, with extensive Soviet and Cuban support, persist in repressing their own population and in backing the subversion of their democratic neighbors. This endangers all of Latin America and ultimately the United States as well. In this regard, I underscored to the President our promise to stand by Honduras in defense of its national sovereignty and territorial integrity, as is in accordance with our reciprocal international rights and obligations. A joint communique will be issued today reiterating this mutual commitment. President Azcona and I agree that our countries and the other democracies in the region mustact together to end the conflict that plagues Central America, but it's not just up to us. 
Securing regional peace will require an end to Communist aggression as well as national reconciliation and democratization within Nicaragua. Honduras has been diligent and persistent in its pursuit of a comprehensive and verifiable solution within the framework of the Contadora negotiations, and, Mr. President, you have our support in these efforts. The United States continues to believe that a realistic and enforceable agreement, based on the full implementation of the Contadora Document of Objectives, is one way to bring peace to Central America.


Remarks at a White House Briefing for Supporters of Tax Reform and United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
June 6, 1986

Shortly, the House of Representatives will be deciding if the United States is to help those Nicaraguans who are fighting for democracy in their native land. Providing this assistance is both a moral imperative and the course of action most consistent with our own security interests. What we do to help Nicaraguan freedom fighters is every bit as moral and just as anything this nation, or any other nation, has done to aid those struggling for their liberty and independence. As Americans, we're the arsenal for democracy, the keepers of the flame that Jefferson wrote about when he penned these words: "... the flames kindled on the Fourth of July, 1776, have spread over too much of the globe to be extinguished by the feeble engines of despotism .... " 
But expressions of solidarity aren't enough. Albert Camus, a leader in the French underground during the Nazi occupation, wrote during the war, "Contrary to what we sometimes used to think, the spirit is of no avail against the sword, but that the spirit together with the sword will always win out over the sword alone." Well, those who fight for freedom are our brothers and sisters, and they deserve more from the United States than words. With our adversary arming totalitarian forces to the teeth, we must have the courage to give those who share our ideals, especially those in this hemisphere, what they need to defend themselves and to win the day. 
In recent years we've witnessed in the Americas the greatest expansion of democracy in this century. Today 90 percent of the people of the Western Hemisphere-North, South, and Central America—live in countries that are democracies or are in transition to democracy. We cannot stand by and permit a Soviet beachhead, which will be used to undermine this process, to be consolidated on the mainland of the Western Hemisphere. The zeal of the Communist regime in Managua for internal repression is matched only by its commitment to subvert neighboring democracies and to spread terror and chaos far and near. The Nicaraguan Government has provided weapons, logistical support, and training for Communist revolutionary movements that are plaguing Latin America. And the Palestinian Liberation Organization, Italy's Red Brigade, the Baader-Meinhof gang, and agents of Colonel Qadhafi—all are in and out of Managua all the time, and there is a close connection. Now, is this a threat to the rest of Central and South America? Yes. Is this a threat, ultimately, to the United States? Yes. The strategy of the Sandinistas should now be clear to everyone. It's a strategy of delay—dragging out negotiations, never taking a serious position—so they can wipe out their opposition while Congress waits to see if a peace treaty is around the corner. Well, if we continue to delay, all we are doing is playing into the hands of the Nicaraguan Communists. We must stop falling victim to stall tactics. 
We cannot, we must not, downplay the threat to our country or to freedom in the hemisphere. To deny aid to the contras is a mandate for inaction which could well result in the creation of a Libya on our own doorstep. Let's not kid ourselves. If the opponents of aid have their way—preventing us from assisting our friends—Central America could soon become a divided, war-torn region with Nicaragua a refuge and safe haven for terrorism. If this happens, the American people will know who to blame. As President of the United States, my primary job is not placing blame; it's the security of this country. Deserting the Nicaraguan freedom fighters would be a national security disaster for the United States. And together we can see this never happens


Remarks to the Georgetown University Center for Strategic and International Studies on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
June 9, 1986

This evening I would like to speak briefly on a matter of central importance to the security of our nation and hemisphere, but a matter, above all, of central importance to the cause of human liberty. I refer to aid for the democratic resistance forces of Nicaragua. Now, I know that each of you is a foreign policy expert and that you've studied this issue, each of you, in detail; and I value that. But in a complex of politics, in the midst of all the twistings and turnings, one can sometimes discern a moment of impending decision, a moment to reduce the issue at hand to the plain facts and submit, if you will, the closing argument. With your permission, I would like to submit that argument this evening before you and the Nation. 
After the nearly 7 years during which the Nicaraguan Communists have held power, there can no longer be any legitimate doubt about the nature of their regime. There is a brave man in Nicaragua, a man who courageously opposed the Somoza dictatorship. And listen for a moment to that man, to the words of Cardinal Obando y Bravo, Archbishop of Managua, as they recently appeared in the Washington Post: To consider the Sandinista regime democratic, as Cardinal Obando y Bravo asserts, is "to ignore the mass exodus of the Miskito Indians, who on numerous occasions fled in the thousands. It is also to ignore the departure of tens of thousands of Nicaraguan men and women of every age, profession, economic status, and political persuasion. It is to ignore that many of those who are leaders or participants in the counterrevolution were once leaders or members of the Sandinista front or were ministers in the Sandinista government. It is to ignore the lack of any justification for the most terrible violation of freedom of the press and of speech in the history of our country. It is to ignore the progressive and suffocating restriction of public liberties under the cover of an interminable national emergency law and the continual violation of human rights. It is to ignore the expulsion of priests and the mass exodus of young people eligible for military service... None of this is true of a government that has the sympathy and general support of the people." Well, I might add that not long after Cardinal Obando y Bravo wrote that statement for the Washington Post, the Sandinista regime cut off electricity to his office—just one more act of harassment among many scores of such acts visited upon him. 
Yet despite the brutal and totalitarian nature of the Sandinista regime, the struggle for freedom inside Nicaragua continues. By the thousands, men and women have moved into the countryside and taken up arms. Indeed, today these democratic resistance forces number some 20,000—four times the number of troops the Sandinistas had in the field when they themselves seized power. In full knowledge, the members of the resistance have chosen to separate themselves from their families and homes, to live in conditions of immense hardship, often with scant water and food, and to expose themselves to the dangers of battle. They fight to liberate their country from a regime that is loyal only to Communist powers. They fight for freedom. 
Just as the men and women of the resistance have decided what they must do, so, too, have Gorbachev, Castro, Arafat, and Qadhafi. Soviet military advisers in Nicaragua number in the hundreds. The Sandinistas possess at least six Soviet-built HIND attack helicopters—helicopters that represent, in effect, flying tanks. Cuban troops swarm the streets of Managua by the scores, and the PLO has established an embassy there. Links between the Sandinistas, the PLO, the Libyans, and others are extensive. And let no one forget the photograph of Libya's Qadhafi and the Sandinistas' Ortega. In that photo there they stand, their fists clenched in a salute of solidarity. 
The Communists have made their decision; the resistance has made its decision; and now we must make ours. The choice is stark; the choice is unavoidable. We can help our neighbors in their struggle for freedom, or, by doing nothing, we can abandon them to a Communist dictatorship. Over 3 months ago, I submitted to the Congress a plan to provide the resistance forces of Nicaragua with $100 million in urgently needed support. More than 2 months ago, the Senate approved the plan. Now, at last, a new vote in the House is scheduled to take place. I want the House—I want the country—to know how much is riding on this decision. 
If the House chooses to deny to the Nicaraguan resistance the help it needs and deserves, this will, in effect, grant permission to the Sandinistas to ignore any negotiated settlement and pursue a military victory instead. The final outcome is only too predictable. Backed by a steady supply of arms from the Soviets and Cubans, the Sandinistas will be able to pin down the freedom fighters, surround them, and, in time, crush them. Whatever is left of free institutions in Nicaragua will be utterly destroyed. And upon the ruins of Nicaragua's best yearnings and aspirations, upon the mutilated hopes of her people, a second Cuba—indeed a second Libya—will have been ruthlessly built. We can be certain that tens of thousands of Nicaraguan refugees will seek to inundate our Southern States. More than a quarter of a million Nicaraguans, nearly 10 percent of the entire population, have already fled the country. 
But none of this need take place. If the House votes to give the Nicaraguan resistance the support we've proposed, democracy in that nation can be given a chance. Again and again, the freedom fighters have proven their commitment to just this hope. Last month they took steps to broaden their political base and increase their support among the Nicaraguan people. With adequate training and supplies, they could mobilize the oppressed people of their country and win untold new recruits. If only the House votes yes. 
Our goal is not—and repeat not—a military solution. Instead we seek to help the freedom fighters achieve only the leverage they need to bring the Communists to the table and negotiate a political and democratic solution. Three times the resistance has already offered to put down its arms and go to the table. Three times the Communists have said no. The Catholic Church in Nicaragua supports an internal reconciliation aimed at achieving democracy. The Communists have rejected this plan. The Contadora nations have backed a negotiated peace based, again, upon internal reconciliation and democracy. The Sandinistas have refused to grant these proposals serious consideration. 
The Communists are intransigent because they believe they can afford to be. Each day the military situation in Nicaragua twists another dangerous degree in favor of the Communists. In the months since we made our initial request for assistance, Soviet-supplied weapons in Nicaragua have mounted, censorship and other human rights violations have increased, and human suffering has grown. And now those who oppose aid must ask searching and painful questions. Can we bear responsibility for such anguish? Can we permit ourselves to acquiesce in the Sandinista tactic of delay, delay, delay? 
Again, I must repeat that there is hope. Just 10 years ago, less than one-third of the people of Latin America lived in democracies. Today that figure is 90 percent. Many had written off El Salvador. Others claimed there was no hope in Honduras and Guatemala. Today those nations have their freedom, and today democracy in Latin America constitutes a swelling and life-giving tide. It can still flood its powerful, cleansing way into Nicaragua—the Communist wall against it is high, but not yet too high—if only the House takes action. And I appeal here to Democrats and Republicans alike: The issue is human freedom, and it towers above all partisan concerns. What it comes down to in the end is the matter of witness, of choosing whether to believe those whom we know to be providing us with accurate reports about Nicaragua, or to listen instead to the whispering voices within our own minds that say there is no trouble there. Not because this is the truth, but because we don't want to be convenienced [inconvenienced] by the need to risk action. 
Once again that good man Cardinal Obando y Bravo, that foe of tyranny, whether Somoza's or the Sandinistas', has put the case before us. He writes to the editor of the Washington Post: "Your message asking me for an article arrived on Sunday, just as I finished celebrating Mass. During the Mass I read the pastoral letter which we, the bishops of Nicaragua, had written for Holy Week. The pulpit was now our only means of disseminating information, because the letter was totally censored and pulled from the pages of the newspaper La Prensa, the only private newspaper left in the country." 
The Cardinal goes on to relate that church offices had been appropriated by government order; that a church printing press had been confiscated by the state security police; that the government had shut down Radio Catolica, the only Catholic radio station; and that even the Sunday bulletin, with the prayers and texts for the day, had been confiscated. "It was at this point," the Cardinal writes, "when the Church was gagged and bound, that your request arrived. The reading for the day pricked my conscience. The Sanhedrin sent for Peter and John, intending to force them into silence. 'But Peter and John said to them in reply, is it right in God's eyes for us to obey you rather than God? Judge for yourselves. We cannot possibly give up speaking of things we have seen and heard.'" Those were the Archbishop's words. 
My friends, let us give heed to those in Nicaragua who, like Cardinal Obando y Bravo and so many others, speak to us of the things they've seen and heard. And let us, pray God, move to help them.

The President's News Conference
June 11, 1986
Finally, there is the upcoming vote on aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. Congress must understand the urgency of the situation in Central America. Delay is deadly and plays right along with the Communist game plan. Because while we may have tied our own hands, the Soviets, Cubans, and Libyans haven't tied theirs. With over $1 billion of support and some of the most fearsome weapons in the Soviet arsenal, the Communist strategy is simple: Hold off American aid as long as possible in the hope they can destroy all opposition before help arrives. Itistime for an up-and-down vote on freedom in Nicaragua, an up-or-down vote on whether the United States is going to stop Soviet expansionism on the American mainland while the price is still not too high and the risks are still not too great. We mustact now in a bipartisan way to do theright thing: to rescue freedom in Nicaragua and protect the national security of the United States

The President. I couldn't and, Jerry, wouldn't comment on anything that might be further actions for us, because I don't think you could do that without informing them of anything we're thinking. And right now we have not planned for any contingency beyond aiding the contras, because we think that—I've got to stop using that word. That was the Sandinistas' title for them, and I don't like to do anything they're doing. So the freedom fighters, we believe, with all the information that we have, that they are capable of, at the very least, applying sufficient leverage that they could bring the Sandinista government to a negotiating table for a settlement. We would prefer that over a military settlement, if that can be done. We know that there are thousands of recruits that are waiting to join the freedom fighters, and they need the weapons and ammunition and so forth for them


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a White House Luncheon for Regional Editors and Broadcasters 
June 13, 1986

Well, indeed, they could not, and neither can we. You know what storm I speak of. Earlier this week, to a Georgetown group, I spoke of the situation in Nicaragua. My remarks were well covered, and you're familiar with all the arguments, pro and con. You know my views. 
The current regime in Nicaragua sustained, encouraged, and used by Cuba and the Soviet Union is intent upon institutionalizing a Communist totalitarian form of government in that country. A Communist regime in our hemisphere is good news for no one. It's bad news for those who love freedom and bad news for those who love peace. 
We have a chance to help stop this ominous development and help stop it relatively cheaply by giving support, financial and material support, to the growing body of men and women in Nicaragua who are resisting the imposition of communism in their homeland. We prefer a peaceful solution to the problems of Central America, but it's every day more evident that the Sandinista game is a game of delay designed only to give themselves time to crush the democratic opposition and consolidate their totalitarian system of control over Nicaraguan society. 
We're now asking for $100 million in aid—$100 million to help the democratic forces resist and to pressure the Sandinistas to remember their promises of democracy and peace to the people of Nicaragua and the wider international community. I'm telling you this because I'll need your help and the help of the American people. I know that support begins with understanding. And so, if there's anything that is left that is not understood about our policy toward Nicaragua, well, I'm here prepared to testify, as they say. So, let's fire away. 
The President. Let me say that in any conflict of this kind, we understand, of course, that there are going to be individual deeds, there are going to be acts of brutality, whether against civilians or whatever, by individuals. But we know and are satisfied that the policy of the leaders is one of abiding by humanitarian rules of warfare as far as the contras are concerned. This is not particularly true of the Sandinista forces, and we've had individuals here in our country testify as to the brutal treatment that they have received. And we have not found that—well, much of this we have found is a part of a disinformation campaign tending to discredit them. 
For example, the charges of dope running-well, the factual evidence that we have—and it's photographic as the result of a kind of sting operation is that among the high officials of the Sandinista government, utilizing one of their military air bases, is the transshipment of drugs aimed for the United States. And, as I say, this we have pictured. And now, the latest one is: The big investigation is has there been shenanigans with the $27 million of humanitarian aid that was sent down there or that was passed by the Congress, reluctantly, to do this. Well, I don't see why their investigation has not revealed, as yet, that they were so concerned that the agencies of the executive branch might not be trustworthy in the handling of this money, that in the passing of the $27 million, they laid down the strict rules as to exactly how that money must be delivered and spent. And we followed those rules. I think they ought to give us back control over that because they didn't do too well. 

Remarks at a White House Briefing for Supporters of United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
June 16, 1986

Well, I expect the upcoming vote on aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters will signal the reemergence of bipartisanship in areas of national security and an end to the pessimism and disunity of the last decade. Over 2 months ago many Democrats voted for aid to the freedom fighters, and we're reaching out now to many more Democrats to make this truly a bipartisan issue and carry the day for the freedom fighters. We're looking to win this next vote, because it's becoming irrefutably clear that helping those fighting for freedom in Nicaragua is important to the safety of the United States and it is theright thing to do. And under those circumstances, there are no Republicans and no Democrats—just Americans. 
Some of those opposing our efforts have been hoping that the regime in Managua would reform and seek reconciliation with its opponents. Well, instead, the Nicaraguan Communists have taken every opportunity to smash internal opposition and annihilate the armed resistance. Their hints at reform are little more than delaying tactics, providing them time to silence, jail, or kill anyone who threatens their absolute power. The last House vote on this issue had barely been taken when Nicaraguan troops crossed over into Honduras to attack resistance forces. This was hardly the gesture of good will that many Members of the House had hoped for. That mini-invasion received much attention, but just as important was the major attack, an unproved assault, launched against Miskito Indian villages at the same time. I said unproved—unprovoked assault launched against the Miskito Indian villages at the same time. This bloody operation triggered a panic that led to an exodus into Honduras of nearly 11,000 villagers. And others suffered a fate who didn't leave for those camps, such as being herded into camps and then left with no provision for supplies of food. And yet they could not go beyond the fences that hemmed them in. 
Since the House vote, repression against independent labor unions, the press, the church, and opposition political parties has continued. The jails remain swollen with political prisoners, such as this one [pointing to a photograph] near Managua. And many of the prisoners are democratic union leaders. And today even the smallest vendor finds his or her tiny bit of private enterprise threatened. In the period since the last House vote, Managua has signed economic and cultural agreements with the Soviets. Foreign advisers remain ever present throughout the Nicaraguan military and secret police. The regime, for all its youth and designer glasses— [laughter] —is doing its best to turn Nicaragua into an Eastern European-style Communist dictatorship. And this is absolutely inconsistent with the values and traditions of the Americas, and we're not going to let it happen. 
The Soviets, on the other hand, after a brief respite, are again stepping up the flow of weapons into Nicaragua. For the first time since 1984 a ship coming directly from the Soviet military port of Nikolayev delivered cargo to Nicaragua. And another significant step has been the arrival in Nicaragua of a reconnaissance aircraft with highly sophisticated equipment—as shown in this photo here to theright—which gives the Communist regime a significant advance in its military and intelligence capabilities. There is little room for doubt. The Communists show no intention of compromise, no intention of keeping their promises of democratic pluralism, or of refraining from aggression upon their neighbors. They've been given their chance and used it to thumb their nose at those who tried to give them the benefit of the doubt. Gestures of good will have been scoffed at. Opportunities for peace, diplomatic solutions, compromise, and negotiated settlements have been arrogantly passed by. 
And all of this leads to one inescapable conclusion: If democracy is to have any chance at all, we must back up those who are fighting for freedom and back them with the weapons and resources they need. This is the only way that the Communists will take the demand for democracy and negotiations seriously. Much has been said of late about the consistency of a policy that advocates both aiding the freedom fighters and reaching out to find an agreement that could peacefully end the conflict. Well, there's nothing confusing or contradictory about supporting those who are using armed might to pressure an authoritarian regime into democratic reform. Those fighting the Communists are not, as they've oftentimes been portrayed, seeking power. 
They want only the democracy that was promised. In 1979 the clique that now holds power in Managua made a solemn promise to the Organization of American States and to the people of Nicaragua as to the democratic and pluralistic nature of the government they planned to establish. And that promise was made to the OAS, and the result was the OAS asked Somoza then to step down in order to end further bloodshed. And on the basis of that promise, he did step down. What the freedom fighters seek and what we support is simply adherence to that promise of democracy. What we will not do is passively watch as a clique, armed to the teeth by a totalitarian power outside this hemisphere, as it beats its own population into submission and establishes a beachhead of tyranny, subversion, and terror on the continent of the Americas. 
I tell you from the bottom of my heart, I thank you for all that you're doing. And now is the time to put out the maximum effort, and we'll get the job done. There are thousands of young men and women in Nicaragua who are waiting to join the contras-well, I'm going to stop calling them that. That word was given—or appellation was applied to them by the Communists. They are freedom fighters. And these young people want to join the freedom fighters, only they don't have the arms and the equipment yet to take them on board. So, we know what our job is, and God bless all of you


Remarks in an Interview Together With Written Responses to Questions Submitted by Le Point of France 
June 23, 1986

The President. We seek to give effective support to those who have taken the initiative to resist Marxist-Leninist dictatorships so they can struggle for freedom. Also, it is justified because of the threat that these regimes pose to their neighbors, our allies and friends, and our own national security. Support to resistance forces does not undermine ourcommitment to negotiated settlements. On the contrary, strong resistance movements can only increase the likelihood of bringing Communist rulers to the bargaining table. The Nicaraguan Communists have so far delayed the negotiation process because they believe that their military power, supported by the Soviets, will allow them to crush the resistance. We want to convince them that a military approach to stabilizing their dictatorship cannot succeed. By strengthening the Nicaraguan resistance, we are giving the Communist regime an incentive to come to the bargaining table. 
The President. The advances made toward the establishment of democratic self-government in Haiti and the Philippines are heartening, but it is the unfortunate case that too many nations today do not enjoy the benefits of representative democracy, which are so important in ensuring respect for basic human rights. The United States has been and will remain in the forefront of efforts to promote human rights and democratic freedoms. We oppose tyranny, whether of theright or left. We have committed our resources and our influence to efforts aimed at extending throughout the world therights we enjoy, rights which we firmly believe are the prerogative of all. At the same time, we recognize fully that there are great differences among the countries which lack freedom. While we will continue to provide encouragement and use our influence to promote democratic development, ultimately, only the people of a nation can determine their future. We have supported democratic yearnings against Communist dictatorships, such as Nicaragua, and we've supported the restoration of established democratic traditions in Chile. There can be no doubt about the strong support of the United States for Chile's peaceful transition to democracy just as quickly as the Chileans themselves can achieve it.

Address to the Nation on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
June 24, 1986

But there's one tragic, glaring exception to that democratic tide–the Communist Sandinista government in Nicaragua. It is tragic because the United States extended a generous hand of friendship to the new revolutionary government when it came to power in 1979. Congress voted $75 million in economic aid. The United States helped renegotiate Nicaragua's foreign debt. America offered teachers, doctors, and Peace Corps volunteers to help rebuild the country. But the Sandinistas had a different agenda. 
From the very first day a small clique of Communists worked steadily to consolidate power and squeeze out their democratic allies. The democratic trade unionists who had fought Somoza's national guard in the streets were now told by the Sandinistas that theright to strike was illegal and that their revolutionary duty was to produce more for the state. The newspaper, La Prensa, whose courage and determination had inspired so much of the Nicaraguan revolution, found its pages censored and suppressed. Violeta Chamorro, widow of the assassinated editor, soon quit the revolutionary government to take up the struggle for democracy again in the pages of her newspaper. The leader of the Catholic Church in Nicaragua, Archbishop–now Cardinal-Obando y Bravo, who had negotiated the release of the Sandinista leaders from prison during the revolution, was now vilified as a traitor by the very men he helped to free. 
Soviet arms and bloc personnel began arriving in Nicaragua. With Cuban, East German, and Bulgarian advisers at their side, the Sandinistas began to build the largest standing army in Central American history and to erect all the odious apparatus of the modern police state. Under the Somoza dictatorship, a single facility held all political prisoners. Today there are 11–11 prisons in place of 1. The Sandinistas claim to defend Nicaraguan independence, but you and I know the truth. The proud people of Nicaragua did not rise up against Somoza-and struggle, fight, and die–to have Cubans, Russians, Bulgarians, East Germans, and North Koreans running their prisons, organizing their army, censoring their newspapers, and suppressing their religious faith. One Nicaraguan nationalist who fought in the revolution says, "We are an occupied country today." 
I could go on, but I know that even the administration's harshest critics in Congress hold no brief for Sandinista repression. Indeed, the final verdict has already been written by Cardinal Obando himself in the Washington Post. Listen carefully to the Cardinal's words. He says that the Sandinista regime "is a democratic government, legitimately constituted, which seeks the welfare and peace of the people and enjoys the support of the overwhelming majority" is not true. To accept this as true, the Cardinal says, "is to ignore the mass exodus of the Miskito Indians, the departure of tens of thousands of Nicaraguan men and women of every age, profession, economic status, and political persuasion. It is to ignore the most terrible violation of freedom of the press and of speech in the history of our country, the expulsion of priests, and the mass exodus of young people eligible for military service." As for the Catholic Church in Nicaragua, we have been "gagged and bound," the Cardinal says. 
Many brave Nicaraguans have stayed in their country despite mounting repression-defying the security police, defying the Sandinista mobs that attack and deface their homes. Thousands–peasants, Indians, devout Christians, draftees from the Sandinista army–have concluded that they must take up arms again to fight for the freedom they thought they had won in 1979. The young men and women of the democratic resistance fight inside Nicaragua today in grueling mountain and jungle warfare. They confront a Soviet-equipped army, trained and led by Cuban officers. They face murderous helicopter gunships without any means of defense. And still they volunteer. And still their numbers grow. Who among us would tell these brave young men and women: "Your dream is dead; your democratic revolution is over; you will never live in the free Nicaragua you fought so hard to build?" 
The Sandinistas call these freedom fighters contras, for counterrevolutionaries. But the real counterrevolutionaries are the Sandinista commandantes, who betrayed the hopes of the Nicaraguan revolution and sold out their country to the Soviet empire. The commandantes even betrayed the memory of the Nicaraguan rebel leader Sandino, whose legacy they falsely claim. For the real Sandino, because he was a genuine nationalist, was opposed to communism. In fact, Sandino broke with the Salvadoran Communist leader, Farbundo Marti, over this very issue. The true Nicaraguan nationalists are the leaders of the United Nicaraguan Opposition: Arturo Cruz, jailed by Somoza, a former member of the Sandinista government; Adolpho Calero, who helped organize a strike of businessmen to bring Somoza down; and Alfonso Robelo, a social democrat and once a leader of the revolutionary government. These good men refused to make any accommodation with the Somoza dictatorship. Who among us can doubt their commitment to bring democracy to Nicaragua? 
So, the Nicaraguan people have chosen to fight for their freedom. Now we Americans must also choose, for you and I and every American has a stake in this struggle. Central America is vital to our own national security, and the Soviet Union knows it. The Soviets take the long view, but their strategy is clear: to dominate the strategic sealanes and vital chokepoints around the world. Half of America's imports and exports, including oil, travels through the area today. In a crisis, over half of NATO's supplies would pass through this region. And Nicaragua, just 277 miles from the Panama Canal, offers the Soviet Union ports on both the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. 
The Soviet Union already uses Cuba as an air and submarine base in the Caribbean. It hopes to turn Nicaragua into the first Soviet base on the mainland of North America. If you doubt it, ask yourself: Why have the last four Soviet leaders, with a mounting economic crisis at home, already invested over a billion dollars and dispatched thousands of Soviet-bloc advisers into a tiny country in Central America? I know that no one in Congress wants to see Nicaragua become a Soviet military base. My friends, I must tell you in all seriousness, Nicaragua is becoming a Soviet base every day that we debate and debate and debate–and do nothing. In the 3 months since I last asked for the House to aid the democratic resistance, four military cargo ships have arrived at Nicaraguan ports, this time directly from the Soviet Union. Recently we have learned that Russian pilots are flying a Soviet AN-30 reconnaissance plane for the Sandinistas. Now, the Sandinistas claim this is just for making civilian maps. Well, our intelligence services believe this could be the first time Soviet personnel have taken a direct role in support of military operations on the mainland of North America. 
Think again how Cuba became a Soviet air and naval base. You'll see what Nicaragua will look like if we continue to do nothing. Cuba became a Soviet base gradually, over many years. There was no single, dramatic event–once the missile crisis passed–that captured the Nation's attention. And so it will be with Nicaragua. The Sandinistas will widen and deepen another port while we debate: Is it for commercial vessels or Soviet submarines? The Sandinistas will complete another airstrip while we argue: Is it for 707's or Backfire bombers? A Soviet training brigade will come to Nicaragua. Half will leave and half will stay. And we will debate: Are they soldiers or engineers? 
Eventually, we Americans have to stop arguing among ourselves. We will have to confront the reality of a Soviet military beachhead inside our defense perimeters, about 500 miles from Mexico. A future President and Congress will then face nothing but bad choices, followed by worse choices. My friends in the House, for over 200 years the security of the United States has depended on the safety of unthreatened borders, north and south. Do we want to be the first elected leaders in U.S. history to put our borders at risk? Some of you may say, well, this is fearmongering. Such a danger to our security will never come to pass. Well, perhaps it won't. But in making your decisions on my request for aid tomorrow, consider this: What are the consequences for our country if you're wrong? 
I know some Members of Congress who share my concern about Nicaragua have honest questions about my request for aid to the democratic resistance. Let me try to address them. Do the freedom fighters have the support of the Nicaraguan people? I urge Members of the House to ask their colleague, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, who recently visited a town in Nicaragua that was a Sandinista stronghold during the revolution. He heard peasants, trade unionists, farmers, workers, students, and shopkeepers all callon the United States to aid the armed resistance. Or listen to the report from Time magazine of Central American scholar Robert Leiken, who once had hopes for the Sandinista revolution. He says, "I have gone to a number of towns in Nicaragua where I have found that the youth are simply not there. I ask the parents where they've gone, and they say, they've gone off to join the contras." In Managua, Leiken reports 250 Nicaraguans stood on a breadline for 3 hours. "Who is responsible for this?" he asked. "The Sandinistas are responsible. The Sandinistas." That's what the people said. "The Sandinistas," Leiken concluded, "have not only lost support, I think they are detested by the population." 
Can the democratic forces win? Consider there are 20 times as many Nicaraguans fighting the Sandinista dictatorship today as there were Sandinista fighters a year before Somoza fell. This is the largest peasant army raised in Latin America in more than 50 years. And thousands more are waiting to volunteer if American support comes through. Some Members of Congress–and I know some of you–fear that military aid to the democratic resistance will be only the first step down the slippery slope toward another Vietnam. Now, I know those fears are honest, but think where we heard them before. Just a few years ago some argued in Congress that U.S. military aid to El Salvador would lead inevitably to the involvement of U.S. combat troops. But the opposite turned out to be true. 
Had the United States failed to provide aid then, we might well be facing the final Communist takeover of El Salvador and mounting pressures to intervene. Instead, with our aid, the Government of El Salvador is winning the war, and there is no prospect whatever of American military involvement. El Salvador still faces serious problems that require our attention. But democracy there is stronger, and both the Communist guerrillas and theright-wing death squads are weaker. And Congress shares credit for that accomplishment. American aid and training is helping the Salvadoran Army become a professional fighting force, more respectful of human rights. With our aid, we can help the Nicaraguan resistance accomplish the same goal. 
I stress this point because I know many Members of Congress and many Americans are deeply troubled by allegations of abuses by elements of the armed resistance. I share your concerns. Even though some of those charges are Sandinista propaganda, I believe such abuses have occurred in the past, and they are intolerable. As President, I repeat to you the commitments I made to Senator Sam Nunn. As a condition of our aid, I will insist on civilian control over all military forces; that no human rights abuses are tolerated; that any financial corruption be rooted out; that American aid go only to those committed to democratic principles. The United States will notpermit this democratic revolution to be betrayed nor allow a return to the hated repression of the Somoza dictatorship. The leadership of the United Nicaraguan Opposition shares these commitments, and I welcome the appointment of a bipartisan congressional commission to help us see that they are carried out. 
Some ask: What are the goals of our policy toward Nicaragua? They are the goals the Nicaraguan people set for themselves in 1979: democracy, a free economy, and national self-determination. Clearly, the best way to achieve these goals is through a negotiated settlement. No humane person wants to see suffering and war. The leaders of the internal opposition and the Catholic Church have asked for dialog with the Sandinistas. The leaders of the armed resistance have called for a cease-fire and negotiations at any time, in any place. We urge the Sandinistas to heed the pleas of the Nicaraguan people for a peaceful settlement. The United States will support any negotiated settlement or Contadora treaty that will bring real democracy to Nicaragua. What we will not support is a paper agreement that sells out the Nicaraguan people's right to be free. That kind of agreement would be unworthy of us as a people; and it would be a false bargain, for internal freedom in Nicaragua and the security of Central America are indivisible. A free and democratic Nicaragua will pose no threat to its neighbors or to the United States. A Communist Nicaragua, allied with the Soviet Union, is a permanent threat to us all. 
President Azcona of Honduras emphasized this point in a recent nationwide address: "As long as there is a totalitarian regime in Central America that has expansionist ambitions and is supported by an enormous military apparatus... the neighboring countries sharing common borders with the country that is the source of the problem will be under constant threat." If you doubt his warning, consider this: The Sandinistas have already sent two groups of Communist guerrillas into Honduras. Costa Rican revolutionaries are already fighting alongside Sandinista troops. 
My friends in the Congress, with democracy still a fragile root in Central America-with Mexico undergoing an economic crisis–can we responsibly ignore the long-term danger to American interests posed by a Communist Nicaragua, backed by the Soviet Union, and dedicated–in the words of its own leaders–to a "revolution without borders"? My friends, the only way to bring true peace and security to Central America is to bring democracy to Nicaragua. And the only way to get the Sandinistas to negotiate seriously about democracy is to give them no other alternative. Seven years of broken pledges, betrayals, and lies have taught us that. 
And that's why the measure the House will consider tomorrow–offered, I know, in good faith–which prohibits military aid for at least another 3 months, and perhaps forever, would be a tragic mistake. It would not bring the Sandinistas to the bargaining table–just the opposite. The bill, unless amended, would give the Sandinistas and the Soviet Union what they seek most: time–time to crush the democratic resistance; time to consolidate power. And it would send a demoralizing message to the democratic resistance that the United States is too divided and paralyzed to come to their aid in time. 
Recently, I read the words of a leader of the internal democratic opposition. What he said made me feel ashamed. This man has been jailed, his property confiscated, and his life threatened by the security police. Still, he continues to fight. And he said: "You Americans have the strength, the opportunity, but not the will. We want to struggle, but it is dangerous to have friends like you–to be left stranded on the landing beaches of the Bay of Pigs. Either help us or leave us alone." My friends in the House of Representatives, I urge you to send a message tomorrow to this brave Nicaraguan and thousands like him. Tell them it is not dangerous to have friends like us. Tell them America stands with those who stand in defense of freedom. 
When the Senate voted earlier this year for military aid, Republicans were joined by many Democratic leaders: Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Sam Nunn of Georgia, David Boren of Oklahoma, Howell Heflin of Alabama, Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, Bennett Johnston and Russell Long of Louisiana, Fritz Hollings of South Carolina, John Stennis of Mississippi, and Alan Dixon of Illinois. Today I ask the House for that kind of bipartisan support for the amendment to be offered tomorrow by Democrats Ike Skelton of Missouri and Richard Ray of Georgia and Republicans Mickey Edwards of Oklahoma and Rod Chandler of Washington. This bipartisan amendment will provide the freedom fighters with what they need–now. With that amendment, you also send another message to Central America. For democracy there faces many enemies: poverty, illiteracy, hunger, and despair. And the United States must also stand with the people of Central America against these enemies of democracy. And that's why–just as Harry Truman followed his request for military aid to Greece and Turkey with the Marshall plan–I urge Congress to support $300 million in new economic aid to the Central American democracies. 
The question before the House is not only about the freedom of Nicaragua and the security of the United States but who we are as a people. President Kennedy wrote on the day of his death that history had called this generation of Americans to be "watchmen on the walls of world freedom." A Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, said much the same thing on the way to his inauguration in 1861. Stopping in Philadelphia, Lincoln spoke in Independence Hall, where our Declaration of Independence had been signed. He said far more had been achieved in that hall than just American independence from Britain. Something permanent, something unalterable, had happened. He called it "Hope to the world for all future time." 
Hope to the world for all future time. In some way, every man, woman, and child in our world is tied to those events at Independence Hall, to the universal claim to dignity, to the belief that all human beings are created equal, that all people have a right to be free. We Americans have not forgotten our revolutionary heritage, but sometimes it takes others to remind us of what we ourselves believe. Recently, I read the works of a Nicaraguan bishop, Pablo Vega, who visited Washington a few weeks ago. Somoza called Pablo Vega the "communist bishop." Now the Sandinistas revile him as "the contra bishop." But Pablo Vega is really a humble man of God. "I am saddened," the good bishop said, "that so many North Americans have a vision of democracy that has only to do with materialism." The Sandinistas "speak of human rights as if they were talking of therights of a child-theright to receive from the bountifulness of the state–but even the humblest campesino knows what it means to have theright to act. We are defending," Pablo Vega said, "theright of man to be." 
Well, reverend father, we hear you. For we Americans believe with you that even the humblest campesino has theright to be free. My fellow citizens, Members of the House, let us not take the path of least resistance in Central America again. Let us keep faith with these brave people struggling for their freedom. Give them, give me, your support; and together, let us send this message to the world: that America is still a beacon of hope, still a light unto the nations. A light that casts its glow across the land and our continent and even back across the centuries–keeping faith with a dream of long ago


Radio Address to the Nation on Independence Day and the Centennial of the Statue of Liberty 
July 5, 1986

The other landmark legislation was the vote in the House to join the Senate in approving aid to the prodemocratic freedom fighters in Nicaragua. I feel proud that on this Independence Day weekend, America has embraced these brave men and their independent struggle. Just as the French came to the aid of our revolution, so today we're extending a helping hand to those who fight against tyranny and for democracy. You know, during the inaugural celebration of the Statue of Liberty, Grover Cleveland, standing before the statue, made a solemn pledge for America: "We will not forget that liberty has here made her home," he said. America will keep her flame alive, and it will become "a stream of light that shall pierce the darkness of man's oppression until liberty enlightens the world." After the events of these last few days, you just have to believe that her flame burns even brighter, a comfort, hope, and inspiration to all those the world over who still suffer oppression—in the beautiful words of the poem inscribed on the statue's base: "All those still yearning to breathe free


Remarks on Signing the Captive Nations Week Proclamation 
July 21, 1986

Until all peoples are free to travel and speak with each other, it behooves us to keep Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, Radio Marti, and Voice of America broadcasting the truth to those who are denied it. Until freedom is no longer threatened by a massive military buildup, as has been happening in the Soviet Union since the early 1970's, we must remain vigilant and prepared. Until the Soviets stop trying, through force of arms, to turn Afghanistan, Nicaragua, Angola, and other Third World countries into colonies of their empire, we'll continue to support freedom fighters who are struggling for their independence. Until the people of the Baltic States and Eastern Europe are free to choose their own system of government, we will continue to speak up for their rights and champion their cause. That's what Captive Nations Week is all about


Remarks at a Campaign Fundraiser for William Clements in Dallas, Texas
July 23, 1986

You see, on holding down taxes and spending, on appointing tough judges, on keeping up our defenses and dealing firmly with the Soviets, the liberal Democrat leadership knows the fundamental differences between the Republican Party and the Democratic Party are beginning to sink in with the average voter. Take another issue that's come to the fore recently, an issue where partisan politics shouldn't even play a role. All of you know that a Communist government has taken over in Nicaragua. In addition to engaging in widespread repression of human rights, this government is establishing a base camp for Cuban-Soviet aggression on the North American mainland. But today there are about 20,000 freedom fighters who need our help in restoring democracy to that country. And a few weeks ago we won a crucial vote in the House of Representatives that will help them to do just that. 
And by the way, I think you know I've mentioned in the past that Nicaragua is only a g-day drive from the Texas border. And since I'm here now, I can explain: Don't mistake my reference to the Texas border. The Communist Sandinista regime in Nicaragua has made a lot of mistakes, but even they know better than to get themselves in a tangle with a bunch of Texans. Even with all the tanks and gunships from the Soviet Union, my guess is that the Sandinistas would make it about as far as the shopping center in Pecos before Roger Staubach came out of retirement— [laughter] —teamed up with some off-duty Texas Rangers and the front four of the Dallas Cowboys, and pushed the Sandinistas down the river, out across the Gulf, and right back to Havana where they belong. Come to think of it, they don't even belong in Havana either, but don't get me started on that. [Laughter] But what's really at stake here is restoring our bipartisan consensus on national security issues. Believe me, you'll send that message to the liberals in Washington if you'll elect more Republican officeholders here in Texas. Well, time is running—I only wish I could stay longer.



Remarks at a Republican Party Rally in Miami, Florida 
July 23, 1986

Only a decade ago there were those who were counting America out, and freedom was in retreat. Countries in Africa and Central America seemed on the verge of succumbing to Communist totalitarianism. When I was first inaugurated, the question being asked then was: Could El Salvador be saved? And many thought the answer to the question was no, and they objected to our trying to help El Salvador become a democracy. And many of those who opposed our help to El Salvador are now opposed to our helping the freedom fighters in Nicaragua and El Salvador. 
And reflecting the change that has taken place over these last 5 1/2 years, the question heard today is not whether El Salvador will fall to Communist dictatorship—El Salvador is now a solid democracy—but whether democracy will prevail in Nicaragua. And the world should note that Americans, Democrats and Republicans, are again standing together to meet any threat to our national security and any challenge to the cause of human freedom. Now, symbolic of this new solidarity and resolve was the bipartisan support that was given in the House of Representatives to a bill that provided aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. That wasn't a victory for any political party. It was a victory for freedom and democracy
The President. Well, listen. Well, I want to talk about Nicaragua again. The Communist regime—which even the New York Times compares to Stalin's—has thrown labor leaders in jail and brutally beaten down any attempt to maintain an independent union movement. And that's totally consistent with what Castro did when he captured power. Now, I understand that we have with us someplace here today a lady who was a respected Cuban labor leader in the days before Castro, Mercedes Chirino. Mercedes, many people forget that I, too, was a union leader. And let me say to you: History is on the side of the free, and someday the working people of Cuba will again work and prosper in the warm sunshine of liberty and justice. All of you who have been so supportive over these last 5 1/2 years—the Cuban-American Foundation, Concerned Citizens for Democracy, and so many others—can be proud that you are writing the history of freedom. So much depends on us



Remarks by Telephone to the Annual Convention of the Knights of Columbus in Chicago, Illinois 
August 5, 1986

Permit me to turn now to the issue I most want to discuss with you today, a matter much on my mind. I speak of the struggle for freedom in Nicaragua. There's a brave Nicaraguan who knows all about this. Perhaps you've heard the story of Bishop Pablo Antonio Vega. During the Somoza dictatorship, Bishop Vega was an undaunted spokesman for therights of his people. Last month he met in Nicaragua with members of the press. Bishop Vega stood up for his people again, asserting that Nicaraguans, and I quote, "have a right to defend themselves." Two days later he was exiled from his country. In his words, these days "the only public opinion in Nicaragua is silence." 
As Bishop Vega's case makes clear, the Communist regime in Nicaragua has moved beyond the trampling of general civil liberties to a brutal persecution of the church. The Communists have silenced the church's radio station, stopped its presses, and subjected priests to organized harassment. Churches have been attacked by Communist gangs; in at least one case, a gang carrying machetes and chains. Cardinal Obando y Bravo, who opposed the Somoza dictatorship the Sandinistas overthrew, now finds himself confronted with a new dictatorship. "In my 18 years as a bishop," the Cardinal said recently, "I've never seen a situation as grave as this. This is the worst persecution the church has seen in Nicaragua." 
And yet, despite Communist brutality, the struggle for freedom in Nicaragua goes on. By the thousands, men and women have moved into the countryside and taken up arms. Today these democratic resistance forces number more than 20,000, over four times the number of troops the Sandinistas had in the field when they themselves came to power. The members of this resistance have chosen to separate themselves from their families and homes; to live in conditions of immense hardship, often with scant water and food; and to expose themselves to the dangers of battle. They fight for freedom. And I know you agree, they deserve our help. To support the freedom fighters and democracy throughout Central America, I've urged Congress to enact a plan to provide Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala with essential economic assistance and to extend $100 million in urgently needed aid to the Nicaraguan resistance. Six weeks ago, the House approved that plan. Now, the Senate must takeaction. 
Let me state it clearly: Further delay is risking the lives of Nicaraguan patriots. We need that assistance now. For us to fail to provide the necessary support for the contras would be to risk the permanent loss of Nicaragua to the west, the permanent relegation of Nicaragua to the Soviet bloc. I must stress that neither the democratic resistance nor our administration seeks a purely military solution. Instead, the freedom fighters seek leverage to bring the Communists to the table and negotiate a political and democratic peace. So far, the Communists have been intransigent because they believed they could afford to be; each day the military situation in Nicaragua has been twisting another degree in their favor. But when the Senate approves our aid package, the forces of freedom in Nicaragua will be given a chance, a good chance. 
Consider the historical context. Just 10 years ago less than one-third of the people of Latin America lived in democracies. Today 90 percent live in democracies, or in systems moving toward democracy. As far as 5 years—few, I should say, as 5 years ago many considered El Salvador lost to communism; others claimed there was no hope for Honduras and Guatemala. Well, today those nations are democracies. Today, indeed, democracy in Latin America constitutes a swelling and life-giving tide. With our help, it can still flood its powerful, cleansing way into Nicaragua, sweeping aside the Communist wall that has been holding it out, enabling the people to hold free elections and experience genuine liberty. With our help and our prayers, my friends, I just have to believe that we're called to offer both.
The struggle for freedom in Nicaragua, the effort to defend and strengthen the American family, and, yes, the fight against abortion—all these find a common basis in our belief in a just and loving God, a God who created humankind in his image. "Without the fostering and defense of these values," the Holy Father said when I visited him in Rome, "all human advancement is stunted and the very dignity of the human person is endangered." The Pope expressed his fervent hope "that the entire structure of American life will rest ever more securely on the strong foundation of moral and spiritual values


The President's News Conference
August 12, 1986
One other brief point: Tomorrow the Senate will cast a crucial vote. The question is that of assistance to the freedom fighters who are trying to bring democracy to Nicaragua, where a Communist regime, a client State of the Soviet Union, has taken over. The question before the Senate is: Will it vote for democracy in Central America and the security of our own borders, or will it vote to passively sit by while the Soviets make permanent their military beachhead on the mainland of North America

The President. No, with regard to Poland, if you would check the sanctions that we finally felt had to be applied there, we applied sanctions that we were sure—and we sought Polish advice on this—that would not harm the citizens of Poland, that there would be restrictions on the Government that was at that time denying Lech Walesa and the union and so forth, the Solidarity movement, its rights. With regard to Nicaragua, there is no comparison between South Africa and Nicaragua. In South Africa you're talking about a country—yes, we disagree and find repugnant some of the practices of their government, but they're not seeking to impose their government on other surrounding countries. Nicaragua is a totalitarian, Communist State. It is a sort of a vassal of the Soviet Union. And it has made plain in utterance after utterance, even since the Somoza revolution, that their revolution is not going to be confined to their borders, that they intend to spread that revolution throughout Latin America. 
So, what we're talking about is helping the people of Nicaragua. Just recently, the last newspaper, La Prensa, was silenced; two religious leaders were ejected from the country for criticizing some facets of the government. And we simply feel that the revolution against Somoza, which declared in writing to the Organization of American States what their goals were: a pluralistic society, a democracy, free speech, freedom of press, free labor unions, and all of this-they pledged was what they were trying to achieve. Then one element in the revolution threw out the others that had fought beside them, and who largely make up the contras, took over, seized power at the point of a gun. And we simply believe that the people of Nicaragua have got a right to try for their original goals
Now, this is all going on. Well, nothing like that is going on in Nicaragua, not when a priest stands up and speaks to his congregation and because he says some things that—well, for example, protesting the fact that the Government has shut down on the church's newspaper and shut down on the church's radio station, seized their printing presses so that they can't even have church bulletins anymore—and then he's thrown out of the country for having said that. That's a little different than what was going on in South Africa



Remarks in an Interview With Representatives of Excelsior of Mexico, Together With Written Responses to Questions 
August 14, 1986

The President. Yes, I think we did. Mainly, I think what was necessary was—it was an opportunity for me to reassure him as to what our intentions were and what it was we were trying to bring about there. 
The President. Well, since we have met nine times with the leaders of the Sandinista government in an attempt to get them to agree to sit down and negotiate with the others who are in the revolution against Somoza and who are now the freedom fighters, because the Sandinistas seized power and violated the pledge that they had all made to the Organization of American States, a pledge that their goal, a revolutionary goal, was democracy, free speech, freedom of press, free labor unions—all of the things associated with democracy. When the Sandinistas took over, they ousted their former allies, and they named it a totalitarian government. 
And what our attempt has always been in these nine meetings with them is to persuade them to sit down and negotiate the democratization of Nicaragua, to return to those principles that they had once pledged. And in every instance the freedom fighters had agreed with us they would lay down their arms to come to the table and have a peaceful political solution to the problem. And nine times there was failure on the part of the Nicaraguans, the Sandinista government. They refused. We believe that it's going to take the pressure of the freedom fighters. And what we really think would be the best goal is if they have the strength to exert leverage on the Sandinista government, then we could still have a peaceful political settlement. 
And the alternative would have to be, then, if Nicaragua still won't see the light-or the Sandinista government won't, then the only alternative is for the freedom fighters to have their way and take over. 
The President. Well, it depends on how long it might take for a resolution to this problem. But I think, right now, it can go much further than most people think it will, because, you know, the needs of fighters or soldiers using guerrilla tactics are much less than those of a more formal military structure. As a matter of fact, the rule of thumb in such a relationship is that normally a government and its forces have to outnumber the guerrillas 10 to 1 in order to succeed. 


Address to the 41st Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York, New York 
September 22, 1986

But we must remember from the experience of the 1970's that progress in arms control cannot be divorced from regional political developments. As I said at the beginning, political tensions cause the military competition, not the other way around. But while the United States and the Soviet Union disagree over the root causes of political tension, we do agree that regional conflicts could escalate into global confrontation. Last year from this rostrum, I presented a formula for peace which would apply to five critical regional conflicts that are potential flash points for wider conflict. I pointed out how difficult it is for the United States to accept Soviet assurances of peaceful intent when 126,000 Soviet troops prosecute a vicious war against the Afghan people; when 140,000 Soviet-backed Vietnamese soldiers wage war on the people of Cambodia; when 1,700 Soviet advisers and 2,500 Cuban combat troops are involved in military planning and operations in Ethiopia; when 1,300 Soviet military advisers and 36,000 Cuban troops direct and participate in combat operations to prop up an unpopular, repressive regime in Angola; when hundreds of millions of dollars in Soviet arms and Soviet-bloc advisers help a dictatorial regime in Nicaragua try to subvert and betray a popular revolution.


Remarks at a White House Briefing for Private Sector Supporters of United States Defense Policies 
September 23, 1986

Restoring America's strength has been one of our administration's highest goals. When we took office, we found that we had ships that couldn't leave port, planes that couldn't fly—both for lack of trained men and women and adequate supplies of spare parts. We found that for years the United States sat on its hands while the Soviet Union engaged in a military buildup, the likes of which the world had never seen. The American nuclear deterrent, upon which world peace depends, had been allowed to slide toward obsolescence. And across the Earth, Soviet-sponsored regimes had been imposed in countries as diverse as Angola, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua. 
In the last 5% years, America has also taken a stand with embattled defenders of freedom around the world. In Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, and Nicaragua, we've said that we stand with those who would turn back the night of totalitarian tyranny. And in this I wish I could say that we had united backing in the Congress. But you know the truth is different, particularly regarding our support of freedom fighters in this hemisphere. Even though both Houses of Congress have approved critically needed military assistance for the freedom fighters, this bill has been deliberately stalled on Capitol Hill. Freedom fighters will pay with their lives for this "politics of obstructionism." We're determined to bring their barricades down, to let the light of hope through to the Nicaraguan people. And we will


Remarks to Members of the National Fraternal Congress of America 
September 25, 1986

This increase in volunteer work and charitable donations tells us something about the mood of the country, the temper of the national mind. Just 6 years ago our economy had stagnated, and the mood of the country had in many respects gone sour. Today all that's changed. Our economy is continuing to grow in one of the longest continuous economic expansions in our history. Our defenses are being rebuilt. And the strategic defense initiative, SDI, has challenged the assumptions that have dominated strategic planning since the end of the Second World War. In foreign policy, the United States has reasserted itself around the world on behalf of human freedom, aiding those fighting for liberty in Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, and, yes, Nicaragua. And may I say that I intend to press Congress unremittingly until it finally approves the assistance to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters that we requested so long ago. In fact, I don't, and I don't think you, intend to rest until Nicaragua at last experiences true freedom and democracy


Remarks at the Republican Governors Association Dinner 
October 7, 1986

Now, this becomes clear in even a brief look at the record. When we started, for example, the idea of any major tax reform was considered outlandish, maverick. But today we've not only seen our 1981 tax cut take effect, we've seen the passage of the most sweeping and dramatic tax reform in decades. A recent headline in the Washington Post told the story: "The Impossible Became the Inevitable." Consider aid to anti-Communist insurgencies. When we took office, fashionable opinion in Washington still centered on the notion of containment, or merely attempting to slow the Soviet advance. Well, the idea that we should actually offer help to those attempting to reverse that advance seemed outlandish, a deviation from established and comfortable patterns of thought. Yet today we see our country firmly on the side of freedom fighters in Afghanistan, Africa, and Cambodia. El Salvador is safely in the freedom family. When we first got here everyone was talking as if it was Vietnam—Get out of El Salvador—and now there's a healthy democracy there. Grenada has been finally saved. And, yes, aid will soon go to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua


Informal Exchange With Reporters on the Budget 
October 8, 1986

The President. I'm glad you asked. Absolutely not


Remarks at a Campaign Rally for Senator Mack Mattingly in Atlanta, Georgia 
October 8, 1986

And listen to this: In 1982, every member of the Georgia delegation voted in favor of a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution—except one. So, let me ask you: Which one is Mack's opponent? [Laughter] That's right, the one who voted wrong. In the early 1980's every member of the Georgia delegation voted in favor of strengthening our defenses by building the much-needed B-1 bomber—except one. Which one is Mack's opponent? The one who voted wrong. Earlier this year, Georgia Senator Sam Nunn and Georgia Congressman Richard Ray led the effort to send aid to the freedom fighters of Nicaragua, brave men and women who are struggling against Communists for the liberty of their homeland. Every member of the Georgia delegation voted for that aid—except one. And who do you suppose is Mack's opponent? The one who voted wrong


Address to the Nation on the Meetings With Soviet General Secretary Gorbachev in Iceland 
October 13, 1986

In much of this, the Soviet Union is violating another agreement—the Helsinki accords they had signed in 1975. Yuriy Orlov, whose freedom we just obtained, was imprisoned for pointing out to his government its violations of that pact, its refusal to let citizens leave their country or return. We also discussed regional matters such as Afghanistan, Angola, Nicaragua, and Cambodia. But by their choice, the main subject was arms control. We discussed the emplacement of intermediate-range missiles in Europe and Asia and seemed to be in agreement they could be drastically reduced. Both sides seemed willing to find a way to reduce, even to zero, the strategic ballistic missiles we have aimed at each other. This then brought up the subject of SDI

So you can see, we made progress in Iceland. And we will continue to make progress if we pursue a prudent, deliberate, and above all, realistic approach with the Soviets. From the earliest days of our administration this has been our policy. We made it clear we had no illusions about the Soviets or their ultimate intentions. We were publicly candid about the critical, moral distinctions between totalitarianism and democracy. We declared the principal objective of American foreign policy to be not just the prevention of war, but the extension of freedom. And we stressed ourcommitment to the growth of democratic government and democratic institutions around the world. And that's why we assisted freedom fighters who are resisting the imposition of totalitarian rule in Afghanistan, Nicaragua, Angola, Cambodia, and elsewhere. And finally, we began work on what I believe most spurred the Soviets to negotiate seriously: rebuilding our military strength, reconstructing our strategic deterrence, and above all, beginning work on the Strategic Defense Initiative


Remarks at a White House Briefing for Senior Staff on the Congressional and Gubernatorial Election Results 
November 5, 1986

Well, in brief, then, this is our agenda. Now, of course, there are those who say it cannot be done. You'll remember they first said that back at the beginning of the second term. And that was before we'd enacted all aid for the freedom fighters in Nicaragua, achieved progress toward genuine arms reductions at Reykjavik, and passed the most sweeping, far-reaching reform of the tax code in history. There's one nice thing about it, you know, when you haven't been around the town too much and then you come here. You discover that some of the things you can't do can be done


Radio Address to the Nation on Administration and Congressional Goals 
November 15, 1986

A third area of cooperation—in many ways the most important—has been on the grave threat of Communist subversion in our hemisphere. This year many Senators and Congressmen on both sides of the aisle joined us in supporting military assistance to the brave freedom fighters in Nicaragua. I believe we're beginning to see the recreation of the fundamental bipartisan consensus on national security issues that guided this nation through much of the postwar era. Nothing could be more important than this: When it comes to America's national security, politics must stop at the water's edge. America must remain united in spirit and strong in purpose. We must resist together the threat to our security and freedom posed by an aggressive, Soviet-sponsored regime on the American mainland


Remarks at the Ethics and Public Policy Center Anniversary Dinner 
November 18, 1986

Well, some said at the time that there would be no next victims if we did not interfere. They said that it was not in our interest to hear this cry from out of the totalitarian night. But as we look back now over three decades of Soviet adventurism around the world, can anyone truly say it was in fact in our interest to stand by, hands folded, at the dying of the light in Hungary? And would it be today in our interest to stand by and watch the dying of the light in Afghanistan, the dying of the light in Angola, the dying of the light in Nicaragua? I say no. Not then. Not now. Not ever. Yes, it is in our interest to stand with those who would take arms against the sea of darkness. It is in our interest to stand with those who would light even a candle in the night of oppression. It is in our interest not simply because of what the Soviets are, but because of what we, the free peoples of the world, are


The President's News Conference
November 19, 1986
The President. No, and I believe that I've answered that question, I think, more than once here—that no, we still hold to our position, and Iran officially is still on our list of nations that have been supporting terrorism. But I'm talking about the people that we were doing business with, and they gave us indication and evidence that that policy was changing. And so, as I said, to give them more prestige and muscle there where they were, we made this sale. 
The President. No, we have not thought of that, and we still believe very much in supporting the contras, because we believe in the contras' cause. The contras have made it plain that all they seek is to be able to put enough pressure on the Sandinista government for that government to negotiate with them and the people of Nicaragua for the kind of government that they altogether had promised when they were fighting the revolution against the Somoza dictatorship. And it was the Sandinistas who, as Communist groups usually do, simply, when the revolution was over, they did everything they could to get rid of their fellow revolutionaries, and they seized power and created a totalitarian Communist state. 
Now, the Sandinista—or the contras have never proposed overthrowing the government. They have repeatedly offered and said: "We simply want to be able to negotiate and have a chance to have the government installed that we'd promised the Organization of American States we were fighting for." So, I think we continue to help them, but we believe that there is a value in maintaining relations. It gives us a listening post in Nicaragua


Remarks at the Annual Senate Republican Dinner 
November 21, 1986

Those of us in the class of 1980 came here 6 years ago, dedicated to strengthening our country's economy, rebuilding our defenses, and restoring our confidence. To those of you who will leave the Senate next year, we can be proud of what we've accomplished, individually and collectively. Mark Andrews has stood by and fought for the farmer through difficult times. And thanks to the efforts of Jim Abdnor, this week I was able to sign a landmark water resources bill into law which will benefit Americans of present and future generations. Jim Broyhill has had a long and dedicated career in Congress. A keen parliamentarian-he brought the leadership in the area of energy and commerce. Jerry Denton, an American hero, is a hero still. In the Senate he fought against terrorism and held up traditional family values. Slade Gorton played a key role as a member of the Budget Committee and helped to give us a stronger America. Paula Hawkins mobilized our country against drugs and child abuse. Mack Mattingly championed the line-item veto and was indispensable this year to our success in aiding the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. Each of you has my thanks, and I know that of your colleagues. But more important, you have the gratitude of the Nation


Address to the Nation on the Investigation of the Iran Arms and Contra Aid Controversy 
December 2, 1986

And I have said earlier that I would welcome the appointment of an independent counsel to look into allegations of illegality in the sale of arms to Iran and the use of funds from these sales to assist the forces opposing the Sandinista government in Nicaragua. This morning, Attorney General Meese advised me of his decision that his investigation has turned up reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation by an independent counsel would be appropriate. Accordingly, consistent with his responsibilities under the Independent Counsel Act, I immediately urged him to apply to the court here in Washington for the appointment of an independent counsel


Remarks Following Discussions With President Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica 
December 4, 1986

Yet over this fragile democratic promise looms the shadow of Communist dictatorship in Nicaragua, where a totalitarian, expansionist regime violates the human rights of its people and threatens the peace and freedom of its neighbors. Hundreds of thousands of Nicaraguans have already fled the hunger, repression, and assassination in their own land, seeking safety in Costa Rica and Honduras. This challenge cannot be ignored without imperiling the peace, stability, and freedom in all of Central America. 
President Arias, you have earned the respect of free people everywhere with your courageous defense of theright of the Nicaraguan people to liberty. Despite threats, insults, and provocation, Mr. President, you have not shrunk from your firm stand against totalitarianism next door. As the leader of the region's oldest and strongest democracy, your words have special significance and carry moral weight. As you've said: Democratization is the key to peace in Central America. 
Well, the United States agrees. Promoting and protecting democracy has the full backing of the Congress and the American people. The establishment of a Soviet beachhead on the mainland of the Americas, a base camp for terrorism and the subversion of democracy, remains unacceptable. There has been no deterioration of ourcommitment, no weakening of ourresolve. Let there be no mistake, the free people of Central America will not be abandoned to Communist domination. Our support for freedom in your region, President Arias, remains unflinching. Costa Ricans and the other free people of Central America can have faith that they will not be abandoned in the face of this deadly threat to your security and freedom. Central America belongs to the future, and the future is democracy


Remarks on Signing the Human Rights Day, Bill of Rights Day, and Human Rights Week Proclamation 
December 10, 1986

What happened in Cuba is now happening in Nicaragua. An unmistakable pattern: repression, attacks on the church, the closing down of newspapers, the destruction of independent unions, and the construction of concentration camps and prisons on a scale never imagined. The Sandinista regime has repeatedly hampered the Organization of American States attempts to investigate charges of human rights violations. A short time ago a message was smuggled out of a Sandinista prison which revealed stories not dissimilar to those of Mr. Valladares


Radio Address to the Nation on the State of the Union 
January 24, 1987

On Tuesday night I'll follow the men who preceded me in office by addressing each of these themes. Of our national security, I will once again stress that no duty of the Federal Government is more important than the defense of this Republic. I will reassert the importance of the American virtues of boldness and innovation—virtues embodied in our Strategic Defense Initiative. In addressing economic matters, I will announce initiatives regarding jobs, education, and continued economic growth-measures designed to keep America competitive throughout the world and provide new jobs and opportunities here at home. And, yes, I will address the urgent need for the Federal Government to control its own spending and to do so permanently by amending the Constitution. And in speaking about the great theme liberty, I will state that our national experiment remains proud and successful. Now we must extend liberty to others, providing, in particular, steady and substantial aid to freedom fighters in Nicaragua and elsewhere around the globe


Address Before a Joint Session of Congress on the State of the Union 
January 27, 1987

Since 1970 the Soviets have invested $500 billion more on their military forces than we have. Even today, though nearly 1 in 3 Soviet families is without running hot water and the average family spends 2 hours a day shopping for the basic necessities of life, their government still found the resources to transfer $75 billion in weapons to client states in the past 5 years—clients like Syria, Vietnam, Cuba, Libya, Angola, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua. With 120,000 Soviet combat and military personnel and 15,000 military advisers in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, can anyone still doubt their single-minded determination to expand their power? Despite this, the Congress cut my request for critical U.S. security assistance to free nations by 21 percent this year, and cut defense requests by $85 billion in the last 3 years. 
In Central America, too, the cause of freedom is being tested. And ourresolve is being tested there as well. Here, especially, the world is watching to see how this nation responds. Today over 90 percent of the people of Latin America live in democracy. Democracy is on the march in Central and South America. Communist Nicaragua is the odd man out—suppressing the church, the press, and democratic dissent and promoting subversion in the region. We support diplomatic efforts, but these efforts can never succeed if the Sandinistas win their war against the Nicaraguan people. 
Ourcommitment to a Western Hemisphere safe from aggression did not occur by spontaneous generation on the day that we took office. It began with the Monroe Doctrine in 1823 and continues our historic bipartisan American policy. Franklin Roosevelt said we "are determined to do everything possible to maintain peace on this hemisphere." President Truman was very blunt: "International communism seeks to crush and undermine and destroy the independence of the Americas. We cannot let that happen here." And John F. Kennedy made clear that "Communist domination in this hemisphere can never be negotiated." Some in this Congress may choose to depart from this historic commitment, but I will not. 
This year we celebrate the second century of our Constitution. The Sandinistas just signed theirs 2 weeks ago, and then suspended it. We won't know how my words tonight will be reported there for one simple reason: There is no free press in Nicaragua. Nicaraguan freedom fighters have never asked us to wage their battle, but I willfight any effort to shut off their lifeblood and consign them to death, defeat, or a life without freedom. There must be no Soviet beachhead in Central America

Remarks to the Annual Leadership Conference of the American Legion 
February 10, 1987

Today, clearly, history is on the side of the free. In our own hemisphere we've witnessed an historic expansion of democracy. Ninety percent of the people of the Americas now live in democratic countries or countries in transition to democracy. And throughout the Third World, the failure of socialism is becoming increasingly evident. Cuba's tyrant has taken to haranguing people for failures that are inherent in the system he's imposed on them. In Ethiopia, it's becoming even more apparent that it is Marxism more than drought that brought such misery and the starvation to a once proud people. The despotism and atheism of communism have even spurred resistance movements that are threatening Soviet colonial regimes in Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, and Nicaragua. It's both in our national interest and consistent with our traditions as a free people to assist these brave souls who are struggling for their freedom and national independence. That's especially true when it comes to those fighting Soviet-backed tyranny in Central America. We must not and will not abandon them. If you hear anyone anymore talking about the danger of Nicaragua becoming a Communist totalitarian state, correct them—it is a Communist totalitarian state. And we're helping the people that are trying to change that.


Remarks at the Conservative Political Action Conference Luncheon 
February 20, 1987

Our confidence flows not from our skill at maneuvering through political mazes, not from our ability to make theright deal at theright time, nor from any idea of playing one interest group off against the other. Unlike our opponents, who find their glee in momentary political leverage, we garnish our strength of purpose from a commitment to ideals that we deeply believe are not only right but that work. Ludwig Von Mises, that great economist, once noted: "People must fight for something they want to achieve, not simply reject an evil." Well, the conservative movement remains in the ascendancy because we have a bold, forward-looking agenda. No longer can it be said that conservatives are just anti-Communist. We are, and proudly so, but we are also the keepers of the flame of liberty. And as such, we believe that America should be a source of support, both moral and material, for all those on God's Earth who struggle for freedom. Our cause is their cause, whether it be in Nicaragua, Afghanistan, or Angola. When I came back from Iceland I said—and I meant it—American foreign policy is not simply focused on the prevention of war but the expansion of freedom


Address to the Nation on the Iran Arms and Contra Aid Controversy 
March 4, 1987

Now, another major aspect of the Board's findings regards the transfer of funds to the Nicaraguan contras. The Tower board wasn't able to find out what happened to this money, so the facts here will be left to the continuing investigations of the court appointed Independent Counsel and the two congressional investigating committees. I'm confident the truth will come out about this matter, as well. As I told the Tower board, I didn't know about any diversion of funds to the contras. But as President, I cannot escape responsibility.


Radio Address to the Nation on Regional Conflicts 
March 7, 1987

In the last few months we've seen movement in some of these areas. In one area, however, we're particularly disappointed. I mean the area of regional conflicts. The Soviets continue to occupy Afghanistan. They continue to supply billions of dollars of weapons to regimes like Libya, Syria, Cuba, Nicaragua, Vietnam, Ethiopia, South Yemen, and Angola, and to supply weapons to groups like the PLO. As long as the Soviets keep this up, East-West tensions will continue. And that's why it is in the interest of world peace to convince the Soviets to stop it. The free world today has an opportunity to do just that. And around the world, in many of the countries I've just mentioned, there are people fighting for freedom against Soviet-sponsored oppressors. We can help them. 
And now, take Nicaragua—much closer to home. The whole world wants to see a peaceful solution there, too. But the heart of the problem in Nicaragua is that, with vast Soviet and Cuban help, the regime there stifles democracy, has crushed the free press, persecutes religious believers, and is consolidating totalitarian control. In the face of this, a democratic resistance is growing. It has inspired the largest, fastest growing, volunteer peasant force in Latin America in almost a century. Its fighters and leaders are largely from poor families. They fight because they've seen Communist oppression firsthand. They are struggling for democracy. To abandon them would betray our own principles. A democratic solution will require real negotiations between the Sandinista regime and its opposition, including the armed resistance. Any diplomacy that excludes the resistance can't solve the problem. 
The trend in Central America indeed, in all of Latin America—is towards democracy. Today four of Central America's five countries are democracies. Nicaraguans want democracy, too. Their current rulers broke their promise to the Organization of American States that they would lead Nicaragua to democracy. And now the Nicaraguan people want them to deliver on that promise. Democracy, progress, and security-those are our goals in Central America, and they're goals the American people support. Last year Congress took a stand for democracy in Central America. This week I asked Congress to renew that commitment. I sent Congress an economic aid package to strengthen Central America's four democracies. I am also asking Congress to let go forward the remaining money they approved last year to support the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. We must continue to stand by these brave young men and women. 
Though Afghanistan and Nicaragua are thousands of miles apart, solving their problems depends on the very same thing: a chance for them and their neighbors to live without fear of aggression, a chance for their people to choose their own destiny. How much safer the world will be when the Soviet leaders see Americans standing behind such a firm policy for peace. Perhaps the Soviets will even start to spend less on adventures overseas and more on improving life at home.

Radio Address to the Nation on National Security and Administration Goals 
March 14, 1987

And in these coming months, that word "agenda" will be an important one. You see, I've made these important changes here at the White House to see to it that we're back in control and moving ahead with all that you elected me to accomplish. On the domestic side, our agenda will include changes in the Federal budget process and wide-ranging welfare reforms designed to bring to an end the cycle of poverty that has trapped so many needy Americans. And in foreign policy—well, let me put it this way: America faces great problems in the world but even greater opportunities. We see a chance for significant progress in arms reduction talks with the Soviet Union, provided we maintain a steady course and bargain hard. Yet, at the same time, Soviet adventurism must be dealt with. Central America, in particular, remains of absolutely vital importance to the United States. And here the Congress has crucial decisions to make about whether our nation will truly support democracy and help resist tyranny in a region so close to our own borders. My own commitment remains rock-solid; I willfight any effort to cut off support for the Nicaraguan freedom fighters and consign them to death or defeat. In domestic and foreign policy alike, what it all comes down to is this: We've got a job to do, and for the next 2 years—with your help and support—we intend to do it


Remarks at the 1987 Reagan Administration Executive Forum 
March 30, 1987

In foreign relations our accomplishments have been just as profound. The rebuilding of our defenses—we've shown the Soviets that we're willing to negotiate genuine arms reductions, but at the same time, we're absolutely determined to stand for the cause of world freedom. In fact, since we took office, not i inch of territory has fallen to the Soviets, while one nation, Grenada, has been set free. Indeed, during our administration the world has witnessed a crucial turning point in the world struggle. From Afghanistan to Nicaragua, today the guerrillas fight not for communism but for freedom. And everywhere freedom-loving men and women, including those of us here today, stand with them in well, if you'll permit me to use a word with special meaning-stand with them in solidarity

Now, there's another great issue before us in foreign affairs: the cause of liberty in Central America. And permit me to comment for a moment upon the recent House vote in this connection. As you know, the House voted to withhold a portion of the aid to the freedom fighters that Congress approved last year. Of course I would have preferred the vote to have gone the other way, but to tell you the truth, after thinking it over, there's a sense in which I actually found the vote encouraging. In the first place, it was overturned by the Senate. But beyond that, the House vote took place during one of the more frustrating times of this or any administration. In the preceding 4 months, we had endured a relentless barrage, yet after 4 months of ceaseless attack, a change of just 18 votes would have won the day for the stand against Communist expansion in Central America. Now, I just have to believe that when it comes to providing the freedom fighters in Nicaragua with more of the assistance they so badly need we'll be able to find those 18 votes. The issue is clear. The choice is communism versus freedom, and I don't care what "60 Minutes" said last night about it. There's the fact that in recent years we've been reestablishing a bipartisan consensus of foreign policy. Democrats and Republicans alike have joined in supporting freedom fighters in Afghanistan, Africa, and Cambodia, and last year in Nicaragua. 
Then there's one other factor. Come to think of it, it's a factor that's bound to have an effect on our entire agenda on Nicaragua and SDI, on budget reform and constitutional amendments, on laying the groundwork for excellence in the 21st century with welfare reform and a return to family values, on excellence in education, school prayer, and protection of the unborn, on our work to promote free and fair international trade, on our efforts to make this a healthier nation, including our plans for catastrophic health coverage and our campaign for a drug-free America. Just what is this last factor? Well, I'll be the first to say that we've been through some difficult times lately and that there was a period when I believed it best to remain silent while we waited for a certain board to issue its report. But now we've heard from the Tower board, and we have a clear account of what took place instead of a barrage of speculation, assumptions, and rumors. We can get on with the business that brought us here and institutionalize the improvements that we've made, so that someone doesn't take us back down the spend-and-spend, tax-and-tax path we were on for a century or so. We've almost 2 years yet to go and the show ain't over until the fat lady sings. I won't even let her whistle. 


Address to a Joint Session of Parliament in Ottawa, Canada 
April 6, 1987

To the extent that the Soviet Union truly opens its society, its economy and the life of its people will improve. To that extent, we may hope its aggression will diminish. Disappointingly, however, there so far has been little movement on the Soviet side toward the peaceful settlement of regional conflicts that today are flaring across the globe. Despite announcements of cease-fires and talk of national reconciliation, the Soviets' terrible war against Afghanistan remains unabated, and Soviet attacks on neighboring Pakistan have escalated dangerously. In Cambodia, Ethiopia, and Angola, the Soviet Union continues to support brutal wars of Communist governments against their own people. In Nicaragua we see such a campaign on our own shores— 
[At this point, the President was interrupted by a heckler in the audience.] 
—threatening—is there an echo in here? [Laughter and applause] Thank you. Such a campaign on our own shores, threatening destabilization throughout Central America-this is not just a question of self-protection; the higher principle is that the people of Nicaragua have theright to decide their own future


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Los Angeles World Affairs Council Luncheon in California 
April 10, 1987

Unfortunately, the news on the one missing item on our agenda is not good. I refer to the problem of military conflicts in regions of the developing world, where the facts of Soviet action are brutal, a danger to peace and our future relations. Despite a claimed desire for peaceful settlement of these conflicts, despite announcements of cease-fires and talk of "national reconciliation," Soviet troops continue to wage a terrible war against the people of Afghanistan. The military threat to our friend Pakistan escalates in a way that carries the risk of larger confrontation. In Ethiopia, Angola, and Cambodia, the Soviet Union continues to support brutal wars of Leninist regimes against their own peoples. In Nicaragua we see such a campaign on our own shores, threatening destabilization throughout Central America and denying the Nicaraguan people their right to determine their own future. 
Recently there've been signs that the Soviet Union may be seeking a diplomatic way out of its war in Afghanistan. The Soviet Union should know the United States seeks no strategic advantage in Afghanistan, but it should also know that no political settlement will work unless it removes Soviet troops promptly and completely and allows the Afghan people genuine self-determination. The role of the resistance alliance is growing, and we shall continue to support it. We'll support any just settlement that leads to a truly independent and neutral Afghanistan and that meets the needs of the free Afghan people. Similarly, Sovietbloc military and economic assistance to the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua reached an unprecedented billion dollars last year; the quantities and sophistication of weapons deliveries have reached dangerous levels. We have theright—indeed, the obligation—to support our friends in this hemisphere against this blatant intervention. Soviet conduct here will be a litmus test of our relationship


Radio Address to the Nation on Soviet-United States Relations 
April 18, 1987

In our contacts with Soviet leaders, we've also pushed for the settlement of regional conflicts that have brought destruction, misery and death to the peoples of Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, Nicaragua, and elsewhere. If an overall lessening of tensions is expected between the United States and the Soviet Union, the Soviets and their clients will have to show a readiness to accept peaceful, negotiated solutions instead of prolonging bloodshed


Remarks at the Annual Republican Congressional Fund-raising Dinner 
April 29, 1987

Preserving the peace is one of America's primary goals in world affairs. However, equally important to us is ourcommitment to championing the cause of freedom. Freedom and peace are inseparably linked, and in no place is that more clear than in Central America. If we permit the cause of freedom to be snuffed out in Nicaragua, if we cower and refuse to support those who fight for democracy, our country will pay dearly for our lack of courage. 
I received a letter signed by several of the field commanders of the democratic resistance a few months ago, just before they began their long trek back into Nicaragua. They went knowing they faced an enemy supported by Eastern-bloc and Cuban military advisers, an enemy armed with powerful Soviet weapons. In their letter these field commanders indicated they understood the political difficulties I was going through and appreciated the faith that I had in them. And they pledged, as individuals who were putting their lives on the line, fighting against tremendous odds, that they would not let me down. What they meant is, they would not let us down.


Remarks to the 100th Annual Convention of the American Newspaper Publishers Association in New York, New York 
May 3, 1987

Much has been achieved since 1981. In a region in which military dictatorships have dominated society, democracy is taking root. A decade ago, only Costa Rica was a democracy. Today Costa Rica has been joined by elected civilian governments in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras; only Nicaragua remains a dictatorship. But while the trend toward democracy is unmistakable, the threat to freedom and democracy in Central America remains powerful because of Sandinista totalitarianism in Nicaragua. The aspirations of millions for freedom still hang in the balance. The elected leaders of neighboring Central American countries understand this; they have personally told me this. They know the Nicaraguan regime threatens their own future and the stability of this hemisphere. They know that the establishment of a genuinely democratic system in Nicaragua—with the full, guaranteed liberties of free assembly, free speech, and free press—offers the only real hope for the long-term peace and security of the region. They know such a system provides a check and balance on any government, discourages militarism, and ensures the people's right to choose their own destiny. 
And that's why the views of our Central American friends and the aspirations of the Nicaraguan people are one and the same: the establishment of full, popularly elected, legitimate democratic rule in Nicaragua. So, what we seek for Nicaragua is simple enough: self-determination for the Nicaraguan people, theright to select their own leaders in free, fair, contested, and regularly scheduled elections. The majority of Central Americans have made this choice. And I have come here today to say to you that the freedom fighters of Nicaragua are fighting for the same thing that the brave woman in El Salvador risked her life for: democracy, real democracy rooted in sound, stable, democratic institutions and ensuring the full range of political liberties and human rights. And I have come here to say that the United States Government pledges to the American people what the freedom fighters have pledged to their own people: that our objective in Nicaragua is clear—free elections. 
On the other hand, the Soviets and the Sandinistas have also made a choice, not for democracy, not for a free press, and not for free elections, but for control through force. In 1986 alone, overall Soviet-bloc assistance to the Sandinistas exceeded $1 billion. These Soviet shipments have made the small country of Nicaragua an aggressor nation with the largest military machine in Central America, threatening the security of the entire region. Make no mistake, the Soviets are challenging the United States to a test of wills over the future of this hemisphere. The future they offer is one of evergrowing Communist expansion and control. And this is the choice before Congress and our people, a basic choice, really, between democracy and communism in Nicaragua, between freedom and Soviet-backed tyranny. 
For myself, I'm determined to meet this Soviet challenge and to ensure that the future of this hemisphere is chosen by its people and not imposed by Communist aggressors. Now, I could go on for hours about our negotiations with the Sandinistas: the Contadora process and the missions of my regional diplomatic negotiator, Philip Habib. But since those first negotiations back in 1979 in which the Sandinistas promised a democratic, pluralistic society, we've seen that these Marxists-Leninists never intended to honor those promises. We've seen them use negotiations time and again simply to delay, to manipulate world opinion. And that's why the choice remains the same: democracy or communism, elections or dictatorship, freedom or tyranny. 
The debate in this country over Central American policy has been direct and tough and, yes, even heated at times. While such debate is healthy, we all know that a divided America cannot offer the leadership necessary to provide support and confidence to the emerging democracies in Central America. I do not think there's anyone in Congress who wants to see another base for Soviet subversion, another Cuba, established on American shores; and yet that is what is happening right now. It's now an issue on which all Americans must unite; it's simply too important to become a partisan firefight in the next election. If we cut off the freedom fighters, we will be giving the Soviets a free hand in Central America, handing them one of their greatest foreign policy victories since World War II. Without the pressure of the Central American democracies and the freedom fighters, the Soviets would soon solidify their base in Nicaragua, and the subversion in El Salvador would reignite. The Nicaraguans have already infiltrated operatives, even into Costa Rica, and they're simply waiting for the signal. Soon the Communists' prediction of a "revolutionary fire"—it's their words-sweeping across all of Central America could come true. 
Let us not delude ourselves about the ultimate objective of the Soviets' billion-dollar war in Nicaragua. There is a line attributed to Nikolai Lenin: "The road to America leads through Mexico." I do not intend to leave such a crisis for the next American President. For almost 40 years, America has maintained a bipartisan consensus on foreign policy. The Democratic Party—the party of Franklin Roosevelt, Harry Truman, and John Kennedy—has stood in firm support of democracy and our national security. This is no time for either party to turn its back on that tradition or on the cause of freedom, especially when the threat to both is so close to home. 
Earlier this year, President Arias of Costa Rica put forward a proposal aimed at achieving a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Nicaragua. At the center of his proposal is an insistence on democracy in Nicaragua. The United States welcomes this initiative and supports its general objective. At the same time, we have some concerns which need to be resolved, particularly on the sequence of implementation. It's essential that any cease-fire be negotiated with the full range of the opposition. It is our profound hope that a Central American consensus can be reached soon and that a process leading toward freedom in Nicaragua can go forward. Congress has expressed its support for the efforts of the Central American democracies to achieve a diplomatic settlement to the regional conflict. They've asked for an increased effort by the United States to examine ways for a peaceful conclusion to the civil strife in Nicaragua. This administration has always supported regional diplomatic initiatives aimed at peace and democracy, whether it be through Contadora, through face-to-face meetings with the ruling party in Nicaragua, or through current Central American initiatives. Let me say right now that I will lend my full support to any negotiations that can build democracy throughout Central America without further bloodshed. 
You know, I recently received a letter signed by 111 Members of the House of Representatives calling for a major diplomatic effort, "designed"—their words—"designed to achieve peace, security guarantees for all Central American nations, the promotion of democratic institutions, and the removal of Soviet and Cuban military personnel from Nicaragua." While I do not endorse everything in the letter, I certainly join these Congressmen in calling for the restoration of freedom of the press, freedom of religion, freedom to assemble, freedom of speech, and free elections—all of which are now denied by the Government of Nicaragua. Our Senate passed, by a 97 to 1 vote, a resolution stating that a "durable peace is only possible within the context of democratic regimes committed to eradicating extreme poverty, to establishing an effective means for equal opportunity for all elements of society, and free and periodic elections." 
So, while Congress gets no argument from me in seeking a peaceful, diplomatic solution in Nicaragua, you can see the key is democracy and that a majority in Congress clearly recognized this. That's why I strongly believe there is a solid basis upon which to build a common effort with Congress to resolve this conflict in Central America. I plan to make every effort to work toward these goals, and I hope Congress will join with me. 
And that brings me to the third element in our policy: ourcommitment, our support for the freedom fighters, who have pledged their lives and honor to a free Nicaragua. This administration's support of the Nicaraguan freedom fighters in their struggle for peace and democratic government will not change unless the regime in Nicaragua accedes to the democratic aspirations of the Nicaraguan people. Every day the Nicaraguan people are becoming more outraged by the repression of their Communist rulers. The democratic Nicaraguan resistance, including the freedom fighters, today offers the only political alternative to the dictatorship of the past and the communism of today. That alternative is democracy, and it's winning increasing support from the people of Nicaragua. 
For as long as I'm President, I have no intention of withdrawing our support of these efforts by the Nicaraguan people to gain their freedom and their right to choose their own national future. In the next few months, I'll be asking Congress to renew funding for the freedom fighters. Again, I stress the danger of the course argued by some in the Congress: that the most expeditious route to peace in Central America is abandoning ourcommitment to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. Delays and indecision here at home can only cause unnecessary suffering in Nicaragua, shake the confidence of the emerging democracies in the region, and endanger our own security. 
We've come a long way in these last 7 years toward understanding the true nature of the Sandinista regime and its aggressive aims against its own people and its democratic neighbors in Central and South America. A new bipartisan consensus is forming, one that rejects all the old excuses. Last year in an editorial entitled "The Road to Stalinism," the New York Times charged that the "pluralistic revolution" the Sandinistas promised is "hopelessly betrayed." Stated the Times: "Only the credulous can fail to see the roots of the police state now emerging." And then my old friend Tip O'Neill, in the wake of one of the Sandinistas' most blatant acts of aggression, declared that Daniel Ortega was what he had always said he was: nothing less than a "Marxist-Leninist Communist," intent on provoking a "revolution without borders." 
Well, now the question before the American people and the United States Congress is: What do we do about it? Well, despite almost universal acknowledgment of the brutal, totalitarian, and subversive intentions of the Sandinista regime, the renewal of aid to the freedom fighters is still a debated question. But I think there's increasing recognition that the freedom fighters are the only ones who stand between the Sandinistas and their expansionistic aims, that they are the major obstacle to preventing all of Central America from being engulfed in the Communists' "revolutionary fire," that the freedom fighters are the only ones who offer the hope of freedom to the people of Nicaragua and a chance for a stable and long-lasting peace in Latin America. They're worthy of our support. 
So, that's why the upcoming vote in Congress on whether to continue providing support to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua may well be the most important vote our representatives east in 1987, and possibly one of the most important cast in their careers in public office. It's an important question for the press and media, as well. I can't help but note that in the new democracy of El Salvador, Communist-supported guerrillas continue to try to bring down democratic rule. There's little or no media attention. Yet just across a border in Nicaragua, the freedom fighters battle against a totalitarian Communist regime and are assailed far and wide as lawless terrorists or worse. Forgive me, but the story needs perspective. And that perspective is provided by the aggressive nature of Sandinista communism. 
Today the people of Nicaragua know from experience the reality of Sandinista communism: the brutality, the poverty, the oppression. And for that reason, they know what we too often forget: that freedom is worth fighting for. It's the same firsthand knowledge of oppression and yearning for liberty that steels the brave Afghan resistance and gives them the courage to take up arms against the overwhelming might of the Soviet military machine, the same knowledge that inspires the brave Angolans and Cambodians fighting long wars of liberation against their Soviet-backed oppressors, the same knowledge that drove the Grenadian people to embrace the American servicemen liberating their country and throw flowers in their path. And wasn't it something to see graffiti on the walls saying, not "Yankee Go Home," but when I was there, every place I looked, it was saying, "God Bless America." 
They were all responding to the call to freedom, a call that has a particular eloquence among these buildings on this island where so many of our ancestors greeted the sight of Liberty with tears of joy. We hear the call of freedom in the work to which you've dedicated your lives, sounding clearly, proudly, every morning and evening in the pages of a free press. Tragically silenced in Nicaragua by the closing of La Prensa, we still hear that call in the brave voice of its publisher, Violeta Chamorro, who makes it clear that on the subject of freedom the press can never be agnostic. She said: "Without liberty of the press, there is no representative democracy nor individual liberty nor social justice, only darkness, impunity, abuse, mediocrity, and repression." 
Well, that's the choice we face: between the light of liberty or the darkness of repression. When, after terrible voyages of sickness and hardship, our ancestors first spied Liberty's torch, they knew that light shone for them—"those huddled masses yearning to breathe free." For those who've known only the bitterness of want and oppression, that torch burns especially bright. 
Today the light of freedom is our sacred keepsake, the promise of America to all mankind. We must forever hold its flame high, a light unto the world, a beacon of hope that extends beyond this harbor, all the way to the jungled hills of Nicaragua, where young men are fighting and dying today for the same liberties we hold dear, all the way into the hearts of people everywhere who fight for freedom


Remarks at a White House Briefing for Members of the Council of the Americas 
May 12, 1987

Only a few countries resist the democratic tide, and among these, the most dangerous are Cuba and Nicaragua. As President Kennedy told us more than a quarter century ago, in his words: "The forces of communism are not to be underestimated, in Cuba or anywhere else in the world. The advantages of a police state—its use of mass terror and arrests to prevent the spread of free dissent—cannot be overlooked by those who expect the fall of every fanatical tyrant. If the self-discipline of the free cannot match the iron discipline of the mailed fist . . . then the peril to freedom will continue to rise." 
We must remember that in Nicaragua the freedom fighters' fight is our fight. Our goal is democracy in Nicaragua and throughout the hemisphere. In the 19th century Europe emerged as the first great industrial continent of the Earth. In the 20th century North America joined it. In the 21st century Latin America will also enter that company. For the sake of our own peace and freedom, it must be a democratic region when it does, for as the Argentine poet Jose Hernandez wrote more than a century ago: "The Americas have a great destiny to achieve in the fate of mankind ... an American alliance will undoubtedly be achieved, and the American alliance will bring world peace . . . the Americas must be the cradle of the great principles which will bring a complete change in the political and social organization of other nations."



Remarks Following Meetings With President Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo of Guatemala 
May 13, 1987

And we're also pleased that you joined with the other democratically elected Presidents of Central America to bring democracy and peace to the region and security to your respective countries. The United States is ready to cooperate with you and other democratic leaders in any process that brings democracy to Nicaragua, which is the key to peace in Central America. Democracy, if it is to have a chance in your region, must not be threatened by a dictatorship bent on expansion and supported and maintained by the enemies of freedom. The United States stands with you and others who seek freedom and would live at peace with your neighbors.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Southeast Regional Editors and Broadcasters 
May 15, 1987

The President. Anyone who would tie things like that together—they're just—it's totally dishonest. No, there has never been any such thing. I have not myself directly ever engaged in soliciting from other countries, but I know that this wasn't even prohibited by the Boland amendment. As a matter of fact, it specified that under the Secretary of State we should encourage such support to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua

I have been telling the truth. I told the truth when I went before the press and before both the leadership of both Houses of the Congress. When the first hint came that there was more money than the $12 million—as I spoke a moment ago, telling about that—I told everything that I knew in both instances. And I am still waiting, as are others, to find out some of those answers, because I had not been informed of anything or any extra money and so forth. But I also know, too, that a recent question has just been taken by a pollster, and you know, a lot depends on how the questions are worded. And this one—speaking of the freedom fighters in Nicaragua—asked do the people believe and will they support opposition to the establishment of a Soviet beachhead here in the Western Hemisphere, and 80 percent said, yes, they would advocate support for resistance to such a thing


Interview With Foreign Television Journalists Prior to the Venice Economic Summit 
May 27, 1987

Now, it wasn't until the leak through that Beirut paper that brought all of the press of the world into the knowledge of this covert operation we had. We had to be covert to try and save the lives of the people we were dealing with. We did get a couple of hostages back; more were scheduled to come out when the news broke and that ended everything. Well, this is when we discovered that I had not been kept completely informed in what our own representatives had been doing, that the whole arrangement had really kind of degenerated into hostage dealing rather than the thing that they had proposed first about how could we form a better national relationship. And in our digging into this, we discovered that there evidently was more money paid for our weapons than we had asked and than we received, and that that money had gone somehow into some Swiss bank accounts, and then one of those accounts was apparently one used for furnishing money to the contras in Nicaragua. 
Now, with regard to contra aid and our ongoing struggle with our Congress—which has appropriated money for aid to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua against that totalitarian Communist government, then the Congress changes its mind and cuts off aid to them—I, from the very first, have said the only hope we have for preventing the establishment of another Soviet base on the mainland of America is by way of the freedom fighters and then negotiating to have a democratic government there


The President's News Conference
June 11, 1987
The President. Well, however they got that impression—and I've heard some of the testimony, also, and so much of it was hearsay—one person saying about the other that I thought they had. I told you all the truth that first day after everything hit the fan: that how we had opened the negotiations that led to the things that were going on there, having nothing to do with the contras or the freedom fighters in Nicaragua, and that word had come to me that I had not been kept informed. So, evidently, maybe some people were giving the impression that they were acting on orders from me. Well, I wasn't giving those orders, because no one had asked or had told me what was truly happening there



Remarks at a Fundraising Reception for Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah 
June 17, 1987

The United States has been strong enough to deter aggression and maintain the peace, in no small degree due to the efforts of Orrin Hatch. He's been a champion of those who fight for freedom in Afghanistan, Nicaragua, Angola, and other Third World countries. He's been a strong voice for America and for preparedness. He's been a representative the people of Utah can be proud of. He's a dear friend and a talented public servant who's there when you need him. If I could ask the people of Utah, my fellow westerners, one last favor, to stand with me one last time, it would be in support of Orrin Hatch's reelection to the United States Senate.


Remarks at a White House Briefing for Administration Supporters 
June 29, 1987

And there's someplace else we shouldn't backtrack. Democracy is on the march throughout the hemisphere. Ten years ago, only a third of the people in Latin America and the Caribbean lived in democratic countries or countries moving towards democracy; today 90 percent do. In Central America, only Nicaragua stands against the democratic tide. Nothing has been said in the last 6 months that changes one basic truth: For our nation and for the cause of freedom and democracy around the world, America must stand by the freedom fighters in Nicaragua


Radio Address to the Nation on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
July 18, 1987

We're about to mark an important anniversary, but it'll be no cause for celebration. Eight years ago tomorrow, the Sandinista Communists came to power in the Central American country of Nicaragua. It may be hard to remember now, the great hopes with which their revolution was first greeted. The hated dictator Anastasio Somoza had been toppled, and the world looked forward to a bright future for Nicaragua. Little did we think then that the future the Sandinistas were planning for Nicaragua would be darker than anything that suffering country had ever before experienced. 
The Sandinistas spelled out their plans for subversion and aggression throughout Central America in the secret, but now notorious, 72-Hour Document, and it wasn't long before they started carrying them out. Arms shipments began flowing to the Communist guerrillas throughout Latin America-in El Salvador, Honduras, Colombia, and other countries. Within Nicaragua, the Sandinistas quickly built up the apparatus of a police state: closing churches and extinguishing the free press. The ranks of political prisoners swelled into the thousands, and beatings, torture, and official murder became the order of the day. Meanwhile, the Sandinistas began a campaign of slaughter against the peaceful Miskito Indians. One in every ten Nicaraguans is now a refugee-leaving home, family, and friends to escape the oppression inside that country. 
If the Sandinistas get their way, the torment of that sad country will soon spread throughout the entire region, engulfing the young democracies that surround Nicaragua. As I said in New York a few months ago, the democratic aspirations of millions in Central America now hang in the balance. The elected leaders of neighboring Central American countries know that until democracy comes to Nicaragua their own democracies will never be safe. And that is why, along with us, they have insisted on one thing: free, fair, and regularly scheduled elections in Nicaragua, the establishment of a genuinely democratic system and all the freedoms such a system depends on and encourages—freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom of worship. 
This is what the Nicaraguan freedom fighters are fighting for, and this is why we must support them. We have worked in many ways to counter the spread of communism in Central America and those nations I've mentioned that are threatened by Nicaragua. We've instituted economic assistance to the region, military assistance to threatened democracies, and, together with our Central American allies, vigorous efforts to negotiate a peaceful and democratic outcome. But we know from experience that the Sandinistas will never negotiate seriously unless they see that the freedom fighters are a force to be reckoned with. Without the freedom fighters backing them up, negotiations can amount to no more than a hoax. Believe me, the current efforts of the Central American democracies to seek a peaceful and democratic outcome will not succeed if the Communists think that all they have to do is wait a few months and see if this country still has the resolve to support those who seek freedom in Nicaragua. The Soviets have spent over $1 billion to prop up the Sandinista regime and to defeat the freedom fighters. The Soviets know what's at stake in Nicaragua, and they know that the freedom fighters are all that stand between them and domination of the entire region. 
Now, some tell me that the people in this country just don't care about the freedom fighters, but I don't think that's true. The more people know about the Sandinista Communists, the more they support the freedom fighters. That's why the closer you get to Nicaragua, the stronger their support grows. Public opinion polls in Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Guatemala show overwhelming support for contra aid. In Honduras 81 percent of the people support it. Of course, inside Nicaragua they don't have any polls, but the people there are daily risking their lives, giving whatever help they can to see the young men and boys who are fighting for their country's freedom. 
In this country, too, we have seen support grow dramatically as the American people learn the facts about Nicaragua. The American people are tired of the off-on-again policy in Central America. A bipartisan majority supported aid to the freedom fighters last year. The American people want that aid to continue. And that's why we've got to get the message out. Talk to your family, your friends, your neighbors—even your Congressmen and Senators. Let them know how you feel. We've got to get the message out, because there's no question in my mind, when the American people have the facts, they'll support freedom this time and every time



Remarks to Captive Nations Conference Participants 
July 24, 1987

In Central America over $1 billion worth of Soviet-bloc military hardware and other assistance was poured into Nicaragua last year alone. The Communist regime in Nicaragua has been engaged in subversive aggression against its neighbors almost from its first days in power. The word about the Soviet attempt to establish a beachhead in Central America is getting through. The polls now suggest that the American people are waking up to the threat of a Communist powergrab in their own neighborhood. Well, let me pledge to you here today: We are not about to stand by and see our neighbors in Central America added to the list of captive nations. [Applause] 
Thank you. I predict the increased awareness of the American people, as you've shown here just now, will permit us to continue providing weapons and support to those brave individuals who are struggling for theright to choose freedom, and not to continue a Communist dictatorship in their native Nicaragua. Our own security and the cause of human freedom are inseparably linked in Central America. The threat is too close to home to ignore or to be deluded by wishful thinking. It's too close to home to tolerate an on-again-off-again, vacillating congressional policy toward that region



Remarks on Receiving the Report of the Presidential Task Force on Project Economic Justice 
August 3, 1987

We're all aware that Central America is today on the frontlines of the battle for human freedom. The security of our country and the stability of the hemisphere are tied to events in that volatile region. We've provided our friends there with the weapons and the military equipment needed to counter an ongoing strategic move by the Soviet bloc, which, I might add, pumped in more than $1 billion of military aid and other support to its puppet regime in Nicaragua last year alone


Remarks to Reporters Announcing the Central American Peace Initiative
August 5, 1987

As I said at Ellis Island several months ago, this administration has always supported regional diplomatic initiatives aimed at peace and democracy. The aspirations of our Central American neighbors, the democratic resistance in Nicaragua, and the Nicaraguan people are one and the same: the establishment of genuinely democratic systems throughout the region with the fully guaranteed liberties of free assembly, free speech, free press, and the simple principle of self-determination. 
I applaud this bipartisan effort in Congress, and I express the hope that it will produce a peaceful resolution to the conflict in Nicaragua. I urge other nations of the world to join in the support of this effort and refrain from activities that would jeopardize it


Radio Address to the Nation on the 26th Anniversary of the Berlin Wall 
August 8, 1987

In recent months, we've heard a great deal from the Soviet world about something called glasnost. Glasnost is a Russian word that, we're told, means openness. But does it mean genuine openness to speak, to write, to travel, even to buy and sell? Or is it more of a publicity show? As I said in Berlin in June, the way for the Soviets to demonstrate their dedication to true openness is to tear down the wall. That's not all they could do. At the end of World War II, the Soviets promised free elections in Eastern Europe. Openness should mean fulfilling that promise. Openness should also mean freeing political prisoners, refuseniks, and other prisoners of conscience. It should mean an end to Soviet imperialism, whether it's in Eastern Europe, Afghanistan, Angola, Cuba, or Nicaragua. It should, in short, mean openness in all the nations subject to Soviet domination


Address to the Nation on the Iran Arms and Contra Aid Controversy and Administration Goals 
August 12, 1987

The other major issue of the hearings, of course, was the diversion of funds to the Nicaraguan contras. Colonel North and Admiral Poindexter believed they were doing what I would have wanted done—keeping the democratic resistance alive in Nicaragua. I believed then and I believe now in preventing the Soviets from establishing a beachhead in Central America. Since I have been so closely associated with the cause of the contras, the big question during the hearings was whether I knew of the diversion. I was aware the resistance was receiving funds directly from third countries and from private efforts, and I endorsed those endeavors wholeheartedly; but—let me put this in capital letters—I did not know about the diversion of funds. Indeed, I didn't know there were excess funds

And there's another area that will occupy my time and my heart: the cause of democracy. There are Americans still burning for freedom: Central Americans, the people of Nicaragua. Over the last 10 years, democrats have been emerging all over the world. In Central and South America alone, 10 countries have been added to the ranks. The question is: Will Nicaragua ever be added to this honor roll? As you know, I am totally committed to the democratic resistance-the freedom fighters—and their pursuit of democracy in Nicaragua. Recently there's been important progress on the diplomatic front, both here in Washington and in the region itself. 
My administration and the leadership of Congress have put forth a bipartisan initiative proposing concrete steps that can bring an end to the conflict there. Our key point was that the Communist regime in Nicaragua should do what it formally pledged to do in 1979—respect the Nicaraguan people's basic rights of free speech, free press, free elections, and religious liberty. Instead, those who govern in Nicaragua chose to turn their country over to the Soviet Union to be a base for Communist expansion on the American mainland. 
The need for democracy in Nicaragua was also emphasized in the agreement signed by the five Central American presidents in Guatemala last Friday. We welcome this development and pledge our support to democracy and those fighting for freedom. We have always been willing to talk; we have never been willing to abandon those who are fighting for democracy and freedom. I'm especially pleased that in the United States diplomatic initiative, we once again have the beginnings, however uncertain, of a bipartisan foreign policy. The recent hearings emphasized the need for such bipartisanship, and I hope this cautious start will grow and blossom


Remarks to Citizens in North Platte, Nebraska 
August 13, 1987

Now, I think a first order of business is peace and democracy in Central America. And last week I joined with bipartisan leaders in Congress in calling for an end to the fighting. and a commitment to democratic reforms by the Sandinista Communist government in Nicaragua. Peace and democracy —the two are inseparable. And if any one of you think maybe I'm going too far in referring to the Sandinista government as Communist, well, I've got some Nicaraguan stamps in my desk drawer in Washington-they carry the picture of Nikolai Lenin. 
The aspirations for democracy, promised by the Sandinistas in 1979—the commitment to free speech, free press, freedom of religion, free elections, all civil rights—must be fulfilled. What this all means is that the leaders of the Central American democracies, the Republicans and Democrats in Congress, and my administration all agree-the key to peace in that region is genuine democracy in Nicaragua. Now, this country stands ready to work with those in Central America who seek peace, but it must be consistent with the interests of the United States and it must be consistent with the interests of those who are fighting for freedom in Nicaragua. Peace negotiations with Nicaragua's democratic neighbors will begin to reduce and balance the standing armies in the region. In this context of freedom, demilitarization, and civil rights—and only in this context—a real election campaign, with real, meaningful elections, can take place. We're going the extra mile with this plan, real negotiations with a firm timetable. And all we're saying is give democracy a chance in Central America


Radio Address to the Nation on Administration Goals 
August 15, 1987

Permit me now to turn to Nicaragua, where we're engaged in a crucial effort to promote human freedom. Last week our administration proposed a timetable for negotiations to bring peace to Nicaragua by opening the country to democracy. Just days later, the leaders of five Central American countries themselves put forward a plan for peace and democracy in Nicaragua. This plan differs from our own in certain regards, but it's important to understand that both insist upon opening Nicaragua to genuine democracy. We welcome the Central American initiative and are willing to work with our Central American friends as they perfect and implement it, consistent with our national interests and ourcommitment to those fighting for freedom in Nicaragua. Our support for the freedom fighters should continue until a satisfactory peace plan is in place, a cease-fire has occurred, and a verifiable process of democratization is underway. The principles that Speaker Wright and I agreed to are valid principles that we hope will assist our friends in Central America as they pursue the twin goals of peace and democracy in the region


Address to the People of Nicaragua on the Central American Peace Plan 
August 22, 1987

The four Presidents of democratic Central America sat down with the Communist ruler of Nicaragua in Guatemala to negotiate a peace plan for Central America. They emerged from this summit meeting with an agreement for regional peace based on promises of democracy. This peace plan calls for sweeping political and social change to take place in Nicaragua.
In the upcoming weeks, our hopes will be measured against reality, and promises will be measured against deeds. The signing of the Guatemalan peace plan was an important act of faith. But our faith must be tempered by realism, because faith without realism will not end in peace but in disillusionment and a permanent Communist rule that will threaten the other emerging democracies in Central America. 
The Sandinistas promised to respect your rights when they signed this peace plan-rights that they have denied you for the last 8 years. They promised to respect your rights of free speech and free association. They promised political, religious, and press freedom. They promised access for all political parties and currents of opinion to the means of communication. They promised to lift the state of emergency. They promised free elections. The Sandinistas now have promised you democracy with the world as witness. Like you, I hope that they keep this promise. But like you, I also know that the civil war in Nicaragua began when the Sandinistas promised you democracy but failed to meet their commitment. This struggle will end when that promise is fulfilled. 
Under the terms of the Guatemalan plan, there must be democracy in Nicaragua in order for the fighting to stop. This is called simultaneity. By accepting the Guatemalan plan, it means that the Sandinistas have agreed that the repression must stop at the same time that the fighting stops. The Sandinistas have told us this before, and no one believes the Sandinistas anymore. Simultaneity must mean freedom up front, or no deal. 
We will be helping the democratic leaders of Central America and your countrymen inside Nicaragua as they seek a diplomatic solution to the war that has befallen your country, but we will remain firm in our policy. Our objective remains the same: peace and democracy in Nicaragua. Yourcommitment to freedom and democracy has created political movement and hope for liberation. For this, the people of Nicaragua and the people of Central America owe you a list of gratitude. I know your deepest wish is to return home to a free Nicaragua. Your struggle has, and always will have, our support, because our goal is the same: democracy. 
Until the people of Nicaragua are guaranteed basic liberties, I know you will keep on with the struggle, and the United States will be with you. The journey's end is Nicaragua libre [a free Nicaragua]. We must not stop until we reach that goal


Remarks on Soviet-United States Relations at the Town Hall of California Meeting in Los Angeles 
August 26, 1987

In regional conflicts, for example, we elaborated a new policy of helping democratic insurgents in their battle to bring self-determination and human rights to their own countries. This doctrine was first spelled out in our decision to assist the people of Afghanistan in their fight against Soviet invasion and occupation. It was also part of our decision to assist the people of Nicaragua in their battle to restore the integrity of their 1979 revolution and make that government keep its promise of democratic rule. Our current efforts in Angola in support of freedom fighters constitute the most recent extension of this policy


Remarks at a Meeting With Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance Leaders in Los Angeles, California 
August 27, 1987

We have much to thank you for. The political and military pressure you've applied, I think, is showing results. The Sandinistas have now signed a peace agreement based on democracy in Nicaragua, and we'll be watching carefully to see if they really comply. Without the freedom fighters, they will have no incentives to implement the measures they've said that they will implement. 
We have not yet decided on the format of our next funding request, but we intend to see that you have adequate funding until a cease-fire is in place and a verifiable process of democratization is underway



Radio Address to the Nation on Soviet-United States Relations 
August 29, 1987

Today the goals of our foreign policy are the same as they have been for the last four decades. We stand against totalitarianism, particularly imperialistic expansionist totalitarianism. We are for democracy and human rights, and we're for a worldwide prosperity that only free economies can give and the pursuit of human happiness that only political freedom allows. When my administration took office 6 1/2 years ago, we found that in some crucial ways American policy had lost sight of these great goals. A massive Soviet military buildup throughout the 1970's had been met with inaction in the United States. The Soviets had added several thousand warheads, introduced advanced intermediate-range nuclear weapons to Europe, and installed their fourth generation of intercontinental missiles, while we simply watched. Meanwhile, in the Third World, Soviet adventurism had reached into countries like Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola, and Nicaragua. 
This week I suggested a number of steps the Soviets can take to improve relations with the United States. They can get out of Afghanistan; they can tear down the Berlin Wall; they can allow free elections in Eastern Europe. And since this month marks the seventh anniversary of the free Polish labor union Solidarity, as well as the 19th anniversary of the 1968 Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia, it is a particularly good time for the Soviets to repudiate force as a means of preventing liberalization in Eastern Europe. And along the same lines, they can stop helping the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua subvert its neighbors. The Soviets can also open their defense establishment to world scrutiny. They can publish a valid and comprehensive defense budget and reveal the size and composition of their armed forces. They can let their parliament, the Supreme Soviet, debate major new military programs


Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Nicaragua 
September 12, 1987

And yet, for all the progress in this region, one country, Nicaragua, and its 3 million inhabitants have seen that dream of freedom trampled. Many Americans have learned over the last few months what has really been happening in Nicaragua: how a democratic revolution was betrayed; how a tiny elite has been creating a totalitarian, Marxist-Leninist dictatorship to satisfy their own personal lust for power and to give the Soviet Union a beachhead on the mainland of this continent—only 2,000 miles from the Texas border, a clear national security threat. 
Yet despite all the repression and Soviet intervention, the people of Nicaragua still cling to their dream of freedom. In the best tradition of our Founding Fathers, they formed a democratic resistance against tyranny, one of the largest peasant armies in the world, with more than 17,000 freedom fighters called contras. And as the contras have grown stronger, the Communist regime has grown shakier. 
So, under increasing pressure, the Communist leader Daniel Ortega recently signed, at a summit of Central American leaders, a peace plan that pledged his government to democratic reform, respect for human rights, and free elections. We welcome the Guatemala plan, but it falls short of the safeguards for democracy and our national security contained in the bipartisan plan I worked out with the congressional leadership. That is why, as Secretary Shultz said earlier this week, there should be no uncertainty about our unswerving commitment to the contras. It is their effort that has made the peace initiative possible. At the appropriate moment, I intend to put forth a $270 million request for contra aid over 8 months—18 months, I should say. 
As Secretary Shultz also spelled out, the Sandinista regime has a long way to go in living up to its pledge of democratic reform. Only 8 days after signing the peace agreement, Sandinista police used attack dogs, night sticks, electric cattle prods, and government-organized mobs to break up a peaceful demonstration by the Nicaraguan Democratic Coordinadora. So, too, the 6 independent Nicaraguan political parties have called efforts by the Communists to manipulate the National Reconciliation Commission set up under the plan "a Sandinista maneuver to fool the international public." They accused the Sandinistas of "violating. the spirit of the Guatemala agreements." And this week we learned that Daniel Ortega will be in Moscow on November 7th, the date the Central American peace plan is to go into effect, celebrating with his Soviet allies the anniversary of the Bolshevik revolution. 
What the world wants from the Sandinistas are real democratic reforms, real signs of freedom, such as reopening the newspaper La Prensa, but not censoring its copy or denying it newsprint. La Prensa and other publications must be free to report, so must the independent radio stations and TV. Freedom of religion must be respected. The Sandinistas have said they will allow three exiled priests to return, but what of the thousands of other exiles? Return is not enough; they must be free to minister, live, and organize politically without intimidation. Genuine free political competition must be permitted. The secret police, with their neighborhood block committees, must be abolished and all foreign advisers sent home. The Sandinistas should know that America and the world are watching



Radio Address to the Nation on Robert H. Bork, Arms Control, and the Budget 
September 19, 1987

This brings me to the third item I'd like to discuss with you: the Federal budget. This week the House leadership worked out a bipartisan plan to continue providing humanitarian aid to the democratic resistance in Nicaragua. But I'm afraid I have to tell you that, when it comes to the Federal budget process itself, the news is not good. In less than 2 weeks, the Federal Government begins a new fiscal year. But has Congress even sent me so much as one of the 13 appropriations bills? The answer is no, even though the passage of these bills on time was required by law


Remarks at the Annual Convention of Concerned Women for America 
September 25, 1987

And now, even though I'm going to change subjects here, I'm still preaching to the choir. [Laughter] The next item on our agenda—and nothing we've done in the last 6 1/2 years has been more important—is the survival of freedom in Central America. Believe me, I know how much your organization has done in that cause: setting up schools, medical clinics, and farms to help refugees fleeing Communist oppression; $4 million worth of clothes in one shipment alone. And over the last few years, you've been vital in getting the message out to the American people. But this is the crucial moment, now is the time we must redouble our efforts to make sure that the hope for freedom in Nicaragua is not betrayed once again. 
In the latest issue of Public Opinion magazine, they printed the results of an extensive polling of American attitudes towards Central America. And the numbers make it very clear the message is getting across. The American public recognizes the great danger posed by an aggressive Communist government in Nicaragua and, by a large majority, favors continued aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters battling to liberate their nation from Communist tyranny. Of those who had an opinion, a huge majority described Central America as "very important to the defense interests of the United States." And they agreed that the situation in Nicaragua is a threat to the security of the United States. Huge majorities believe there is a danger of Nicaragua becoming another Cuba, an aggressive Soviet outpost exporting revolution to its neighboring countries. And that is the real problem: Communist Nicaragua is, in fact, a Soviet beachhead in the Americas. 
And on the subject of aid to the freedom fighters, the numbers were impressive. Asked the question: Should the United States aid the rebels to prevent Communist influence from spreading to other countries in Central America?—58 percent said yes, and only 29 percent were opposed. Well, I can tell you, aid to the freedom fighters must and will continue. The American people want it, justice demands it, and it's the only way to make the Marxist-Leninists in Managua sincerely talk peace. In the months ahead, as the Central American peace progress—or process undergoes its inevitable complications, it'll be even more vital to keep the central issue before the American people: democracy in Nicaragua. We can accept nothing less. 
Only with freedom and democracy in Nicaragua will there be true peace and a chance for real, lasting economic development in Central America. Anything short of true democracy in Nicaragua will at best bring only a false peace to Central America. The wound will fester, and the infection will break out once again. Remember back when they were trying to tell us in certain areas of the media that Castro was the George Washington of Cuba? [Laughter] 
There's only one fair path to peace: free and fair elections open to all. Now the Sandinistas have promised to end all censorship. Well, that's a good beginning, and we must hold them to it. But it's only a beginning. The next steps are obvious: Open up the jails and let the thousands of political prisoners free; let the exiles come home; allow freedom of worship, free labor unions, a free economy; dissolve the so-called neighborhood watch committees; and give the people of Nicaragua back their basic human rights; and last, but not least, send the Soviets and the Cubans home. Anyone who demands anything less of the Sandinistas, anyone who does not insist on true democracy in Nicaragua, is not serving the cause of peace. We'll not be satisfied with mere show, with "Potemkin" reforms. Until these conditions are met, democratization will be no more than a fraud. And until they're met, we'll press for true democracy by supporting those who are fighting for it


Address to the Permanent Council of the Organization of American States 
October 7, 1987

I'm talking about the efforts of the democratic nations of Central, South, and North America to bring Nicaragua into the embrace of freedom, to sever its ties from an expansionist, colonial force, and to secure for the people of Nicaragua the fulfillment of the promises of democracy and human rights that were made to the OAS in 1979. 
We are now at a critical juncture. The Guatemala peace accord, an historic agreement signed by the five Central American Presidents on August 7th, contains many of the elements necessary to bring both lasting peace and enduring democracy to the region. The accord calls on all parties to end the fighting and insist on true democracy and human rights in Nicaragua, including freedom of the press, freedom of worship, theright of free political association, and full, free, and fair elections. The accord makes clear: Democracy is the bottom line; there can be no compromise on that point. 
But while there's reason for hope, there is also reason for great caution. President Arias has stated that it is only with true democracy in Nicaragua that peace will survive. "If democracy doesn't take hold in Nicaragua," he said, "the armed struggle will continue." And of the Sandinistas, he has said: "It is true they are Marxists. It is true if they consolidate themselves they're going to try to export the revolution, to undermine Costa Rica, to try to create subversion in this country." Well, we share President Arias's hope and aspirations, but also his skepticism of the Communist Sandinistas—a skepticism born of a long record of Sandinista deceit and broken promises. I think skeptics may be excused if they ask: Just where will Daniel Ortega be on November 7th, the day the accord goes into effect? 
We cannot forget that there already exists a negotiated settlement with the Sandinistas that predates the Guatemala plan: the settlement of 1979, in which this organization, in an unprecedented action, removed recognition from a sitting government, the government of Anastasio Somoza, and helped bring the Sandinistas to power. As part of that settlement, the Sandinistas agreed to implement genuine democracy, with free elections and full civil liberties. Each nation here, as a member of the Organization of American States, is a party to that negotiated settlement. 
We know now that the Sandinistas never intended to carry out those promises. Just a few months later, the Sandinistas met in secret and drafted what has come to be known as the 72-hour document, in which they spelled out their plans for building another Cuba in Nicaragua. And even as the United States was sending the new Nicaraguan Government millions of dollars in aid—more aid than any other nation—the Sandinistas were busy smuggling arms to the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador. 
But although the Sandinistas have reneged on their commitment to that negotiated settlement, this organization must not. Those promises of democracy and peace were promises we made, as well—promises to the people of Nicaragua that their hopes for freedom would not be disappointed. We gave our word of honor, and we can't walkaway from it. Those promises still form the absolute base of any negotiated settlement with the Sandinista Communists. Full, free, and fair elections and the open society that alone can make them possible, including full human rights and expulsion of all Soviet and Cuban forces—these must be the bedrock conditions upon which any further agreement with the Sandinistas is built. 
This is why, as we press on toward negotiations, we must remain steadfast in ourcommitment to bring true democracy to Nicaragua and clear-eyed and realistic about who and what the Sandinistas are. In response to the Guatemala accord, the Sandinistas have taken a few initial steps toward compliance, but these welcome steps are only a beginning. La Prensa and Radio Catolica have been allowed to reopen, but the other independent papers remain closed. The dozen other radio stations are still notallowed to broadcast. 
Recently the Social Christian Party held its 30th anniversary celebration in Managua. In a demonstration of the internal opposition to the Sandinistas, some 4,000 people attended the rally. The Sandinistas allowed the rally to take place but immediately detained 18 of the Social Christian Party members on trumped-up charges. The former President of Venezuela, Luis Herrera Campins, who was there as a special guest, called the arrests a blatant act of political harassment. 
The Sandinistas must learn that democracy doesn't mean allowing a rally to take place and then arresting those who take part; it means hundreds of such rallies, free from harassment, either by the secret police or by what the Sandinistas call the divine mobs. Democracy doesn't mean opening one newspaper and one radio station, but opening them all. Democracy doesn't mean releasing a few political prisoners, but all 10,000 of them, some of whom have been imprisoned for as long as 8 years. Democracy doesn't mean selectively granting temporary freedoms in order to placate world opinion, but permanent, across-the-board human rights, guaranteed by a constitution and protected by the checks and balances of democratic government. 
Ultimately—and this is the most important lesson of all—democracy means returning power to the hands of the people. The Sandinistas have to understand that they do not have the option of being dictators. Their only option is to lead a political party and serve for limited terms of office if chosen by the people in free and fair elections. What happens in this next month will be crucial, and it will be the responsibility of all of us in the OAS to insist that the Sandinistas give peace a chance by truly opening up their society. More than anyone, the members of the OAS have a particular responsibility to take the lead in verification of the Guatemala agreements. We cannot be satisfied with facades of freedom erected to fool international opinion and then quickly dismantled when the pressure is off. We must insist on real democracy in Nicaragua not for a week, not for a month or a year, but for always. 
All we're asking for is true democracy. Anyone who demands anything less is not serving the cause of peace in Nicaragua. And let me just say there are no new demands here. It is all spelled out in the Guatemala accord and the Wright-Reagan peace plan. Tell me, how can you have democracy when thousands are arrested for political reasons? How can you have a democracy when individuals who displease the Sandinistas are punished by withholding the ration cards that allow them to buy food and other necessities? How can you have democracy with a secret police force, commanded by dedicated Leninists, that keeps tabs on every citizen through the so-called block committees? How can you have democracy when the entire society is being militarized with the military under the control of one political party and its Cuban and Soviet advisers? 
Democracy is made up of specifics—day-to-day freedoms—just as tyranny is made up of day-to-day oppressions. Is it sincere to talk about democracy but ignore the specific markers by which we can tell if democracy truly exists? I don't think so. That's why the march toward peace in Central America must be a march—step-by-step, perhaps, but still relentless—toward democratic freedom. 
Along with democratic reforms, the Guatemala accord calls for national reconciliation in Nicaragua through a negotiated cease-fire and a full amnesty. Just this week, President Duarte has called for a spirit of national reconciliation in his country, urging all Salvadorans to, in his words, "Forgive all those whose acts—or those acts that have touched our hearts with pain." Despite the violence done to him and his family by the guerrillas, he has begun negotiations with them. President Cerezo of Guatemala, too, has responded to the callfor reconciliation, and his government will soon be meeting with the guerrillas there. They've done so because they want the Guatemala accord to work. If the Sandinistas truly want the accord to work, isn't it time they sat down and negotiated with the Nicaraguan freedom fighters? 
I'd like to take a moment now to address myself to the ladies and gentlemen of the press. As the process of national reconciliation moves forward, your profession bears a special responsibility to see that the terms of the peace process are fully carried out and democracy finds a permanent home in Nicaragua. Sometimes in the past, the media has been criticized for having a double standard. As the story unfolds in Nicaragua, there can be no double standard, only one single and absolute standard: democracy. You must keep watch on the progress of democracy in Nicaragua; train all your investigatory abilities, all your skepticism on the Sandinista government. Demand full disclosure. See that they live up to their promises. This could be one of journalism's finest hours when, with the truth, you helped set a people free. 
As I said, the Guatemala accord is a positive movement in the continuing effort, begun with the OAS-negotiated settlement in 1979, to bring democracy and peace to Nicaragua. But although the accord is a step in theright direction, it does not address U.S. security concerns in the region: the growing Soviet-Cuban presence that seeks to establish a Soviet beachhead on the American mainland and the rapid and destabilizing growth of the Sandinista armed forces that threatens Nicaragua's democratic neighbors. 
However, these security concerns are addressed in the Wright-Reagan peace plan. The first paragraphs of that plan state in no uncertain terms "that there be no Soviet, Cuban, or Communist-bloc bases in Nicaragua" and "that Nicaragua pose no threat to its neighbor countries nor provide a staging ground for subversion in this hemisphere." In other words, the Soviet-bloc and Cuban forces must leave. We will not tolerate Communist colonialism on the American mainland. Freedom in Nicaragua, liberation from all tyrants, domestic and foreign—that is the commitment of the United States, a bipartisan consensus on the conditions that will satisfy U.S. security interests. And let me add, those security interests are shared by every democratic nation in the hemisphere. From the first Congress of American States, convened by Simon Bolivar, and the Treaty of Perpetual Union, League and Confederation, the peoples of the American hemisphere have insisted on the sovereignty and independence of member states against foreign imperialism. 
Today there are only two colonial dictatorships in the Americas. Of one, John Kennedy said over 20 years ago: "Forces beyond the hemisphere have made Cuba a victim of foreign imperialism, an instrument of the policy of others, a weapon in an effort dictated by external powers to subvert the other American republics." Today these same forces grip Nicaragua, but there is an anticolonial struggle that has arisen and that can throw off the imperialist yoke. The fact is that there's only one reason why the Communist subversion of the Central American democracies has been, for the moment, blocked. There is only one reason why the democratic process envisioned in the Guatemala plan still has a hope for success, and that is the brave Nicaraguan freedom fighters who are battling and dying to bring freedom and justice to their homeland. 
Most are young men, barely in their twenties, only children when the Somoza regime was toppled. They have heard of the promises of 1979—of freedom, human rights—but they've known only tyranny, the steadily growing stranglehold of the new dictators on their society. They have seen their freedoms choked off one by one, their farms confiscated, their priests harassed. They have seen arbitrary arrests, beatings, and official murder become the order of the day. They've seen other young Nicaraguans drafted to serve under Soviet and Cuban so-called advisers, pawns in their war to impose a foreign tyranny on the American mainland. Yes, these Nicaraguans have known only tyranny. They have seen one dictator fall only to be replaced by nine Commandantes who are far worse, and they have rebelled. Their hearts demand freedom. In the spirit of the American freedom fighters of earlier centuries, they are fighting for liberty, they're fighting for independence. 
There are now well over 15,000 Nicaraguan freedom fighters—three times the number that overthrew Somoza—operating throughout the entire length of Nicaragua. They would not have survived without the friendship and help of the Nicaraguan people. For 7 years now the freedom fighters have prevented the consolidation of totalitarian power in Nicaragua. For now, the billions of dollars in Soviet-bloc military aid pouring into Managua have been aimed primarily at defeating the freedom fighters so that later they may attack the surrounding democracies. 
All of us in public life should remember it is the freedom fighters—most of them poor farmers fighting against overwhelming odds in the jungles of Nicaragua it is their blood and courage that have stemmed the tide of Communist expansion in Central America. Without the freedom fighters, the Sandinistas never would have signed the Guatemala accord, and there would be no pressure on the Sandinistas to reform. Their totalitarian grip on Nicaragua would only grow tighter and, with all dissent quashed at home, the Sandinistas would soon turn their attention to their neighbors. The huge Sandinista military machine, equipped and staffed by Cubans and Soviet-bloc advisers, would spread its shadow across all of Central America. Their proven subversion of the surrounding democracies, only temporarily slowed, would continue apace. In fact, even now, in the middle of the peace process, with all world opinion focused on the Sandinistas, they still continue to supply weapons to the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador. 
We will not just shrug our shoulders and watch tens of thousands of brave men and their families turned into refugees. No, we want to see that nation reconciled. We want to see the freedom fighters able to go home to live in peace and freedom in Nicaragua. The Congress of the United States has made a moral commitment to these men; it cannot just walkaway. I've made a personal commitment to them, and I will not walkaway. They are fighting in the jungles of Nicaragua not only for their own freedom but for your freedom and mine. And I make a solemn vow: As long as there is breath in this body, I will speak and work, strive and struggle, for the cause of the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. 
But continuing aid to the democratic resistance is not only a moral obligation, it is the essential guarantee that the Sandinistas will live up to the democratic conditions of the Guatemala accord and that the democratic countries of the Americas will be safe from Sandinista subversion. We must ask: Would the Sandinistas have signed the accord if it weren't for the freedom fighters? If the United States Congress had voted against aid to the freedom fighters last year, would we be talking about democratic reforms in Nicaragua today? The answer is clearly no. 
For these reasons, I will request and fight for a $270 million package of renewed military and humanitarian assistance for the freedom fighters that will be spread over an 18-month period. The renewed assistance will continue until the Sandinistas, negotiating with the freedom fighters, conclude an agreement for a cease-fire and full democracy is established in Nicaragua. Once a cease-fire is fully in effect, only that support necessary to maintain the freedom fighters as a viable force will be delivered. Then we—and they—will be watching to see how genuine the democratic reforms in Nicaragua are. The best indicator will be when the freedom fighters are allowed to contest power politically without retribution rather than through force of arms. As that happens, our support levels to the resistance forces will decrease proportionately, and the assistance money will then be redirected to strengthening the democratic process underway in Nicaragua. 
In the next crucial months, the free nations of the Americas will have to be ever vigilant. We'll have to be steadfast in our insistence that democracy is the only guarantee of peace. But the Americas would not have come this far without the courage, perseverance, and commitment to freedom that I spoke of earlier. I have no doubt that freedom will prevail. Jose Marti, the great Cuban apostle of freedom, once said: "There are two sides in this world: On one side are those who hate liberty because they want it solely for themselves; on the other are those who love liberty for one and all." 
Liberty for one and all—that might be the motto of this organization. During the laying of the cornerstone of this building, the Brazilian statesman Joaquim Nabuco talked of the special destiny of the American hemisphere and the unique purpose of the OAS: "It seems evident that a decree of providence made the western shore of the Atlantic appear late in history as the chosen land for a great renewal of mankind." That is the solemn trust of this organization: to keep watch over this chosen land, to keep it secure from alien powers and colonial despotisms, so that man may renew himself here in freedom. 
That is why in 1979 this organization, and many of the American states individually, reached out to the Nicaraguan people and pledged to them true freedom and full human rights. Now we must simply hold to that promise, just as we hold to our love of liberty, not for the few but, as Jose Marti said: liberty, for one and for all.


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Jose Napoleon Duarte Fuentes of El Salvador 
October 14, 1987

It was not that long ago that El Salvador was all but written off by many in this city's circles of power. The Communist guerrillas, it was said, were an irresistible force, and the cruel tactics of theright could not be thwarted. The cause of democracy was doomed, so they said. Well, the United States Congress came within a few votes of making the predictions of doom a self-fulfilling prophecy. Our request for military aid to El Salvador was nearly defeated. That would have left you, President Duarte, and others who were struggling for democracy unarmed and defenseless against Communist guerrillas who were receiving arms and ammunition through Nicaragua


Remarks at a White House Briefing for the Citizens Network for Foreign Affairs 
October 21, 1987

And anyone who doubts how the peoples of Central America, for example, feel about this should have been here at the White House last week when El Salvador's President Duarte, on behalf of his nation's people, stepped down from that reception platform over on the lawn and walked across the lawn to the Color Guard and kissed and saluted the American flag. Or maybe they should have been in Managua with our former U.N. Ambassador, Jeane Kirkpatrick, last week when cheering crowds greeted her. And as one of them said, "We want what she wants for Nicaragua," and that's what I want, too: democracy-true, full, and real democracy


Remarks at the United States Military Academy in West Point, New York 
October 28, 1987

We harbor no illusions: While changes have taken place in the Soviet system, the one-party system unchecked by democratic institutions remains unchanged. And yet we welcome such changes as have taken place, and we callupon them to make still more. It is in regional conflicts where Soviet performance has been most disturbing. Anyone searching for evidence that the Soviets remain expansionist, indeed imperialist, need look no farther than Nicaragua or Afghanistan. 
Our policy in these regional conflicts is straightforward. We will continue to engage the Soviets, seeking to find political solutions to regional conflicts, solutions that eliminate foreign troops and return the fate of nations to their own people. In Nicaragua, we support the peace plan agreed upon by the Central American Presidents last August, insisting upon the establishment of full and genuine democracy in Nicaragua. Moreover, Soviet-bloc and Cuban forces must leave that nation; this is essential to protect our own security. 
As for the democratic resistance in Nicaragua, year upon year, for 7 years now, they have fought and sacrificed and endured. It is the resistance—the brave members of the resistance, many of them no more than teenagers—who have kept the Communist Sandinistas from consolidating their power and forced them into the current peace plan. It is the resistance, in short, that has given Nicaragua at least a chance for true freedom. And my friends, I know you agree: We must not abandon these courageous men and women, these soldiers. So, let me promise: Nicaragua will have its freedom. And we will help the resistance carry on its brave fight until freedom is secure.


Radio Address to the Nation on Philippine-United States Relations and the Situation in Central America 
November 7, 1987

Now, let me turn for a moment to another area of the world where brave men and women are working for democracy. I mean Central America. This week the Guatemala peace accord went into effect. The world is waiting to see if the Sandinistas in Nicaragua keep the promises they made to the other Central American Governments when they signed that agreement. Will they fulfill both the letter and spirit of the agreement? In particular, will they institute the stepsnecessary for the democratization of Nicaragua? Will they allow freedom to prosper as the agreements demand? Will they begin the process of national reconciliation? And will they take full steps, not partial steps? The United States will be watching to see if the Sandinistas were sincere when they signed the Guatemala accord or if their signature was just one more propaganda ploy


Remarks to Representatives of the Organization of American States 
November 9, 1987

That's the democratic temperament, the true spirit of reconciliation. Contrast that to the partial and grudging release of prisoners in Nicaragua. Thousands of political prisoners still remain in their jails. Many of them have languished there for as long as 8 years, and the Sandinistas have said there are thousands who will never be released. Well, that's the voice of totalitarianism. 
The contrast is just as stark on the question of negotiations. The Nicaraguan freedom fighters ask no more than the democratic guarantees contained in the peace plan. All they want is a chance to compete peacefully for power in Nicaragua, in a democratic way. But the Communist guerrillas-the FMLN in El Salvador and the URNG in Guatemala—want no part of democracy. They were offered a chance to compete for power within the democratic process, but they refused it. They broke off negotiations, demanding power without elections. Well, I'm sorry, that's just not the democratic way. 
We see the contrast between democracy and communism in another area, too. Despite the clear requirements of the Guatemala accord, the Sandinistas still refuse to lift their state of emergency. President Duarte and President Cerezo [of Guatemala], whose countries are also torn by violence, make no excuses. They have no state of emergency. Only in Nicaragua is the state of emergency still in effect. 
There is, however, one hopeful sign. I welcome the designation of Cardinal Obando y Bravo as the mediator between the Sandinista regime and the Nicaraguan resistance. I have repeatedly said that the struggle in Nicaragua is fundamentally a contest among Nicaraguans over their own future, and that can only be resolved by negotiations between Nicaraguans. The indirect talks the Sandinistas have now agreed to are a way to start that process. It remains clear that the next step must be direct negotiations, of precisely the sort that President Cerezo and President Duarte have already conducted. 
The United States has a role to play, as a neighbor of Central America and an ally of the region's four democracies and of the Nicaraguan people. Our goals are simple to state: democracy in Nicaragua and peace in the region. And clearly, there can be no peace in the region until there is democracy in Nicaragua. 
When serious negotiations between the Sandinistas and the freedom fighters, under the mediation of Cardinal Obando, are underway, Secretary [of State] Shultz will be ready to meet jointly with the foreign ministers of all five Central American nations, including the Sandinistas' representative. Before such a meeting and throughout this period, we will consult closely with the freedom fighters, for the key to democracy and peace in the region is freedom and national reconciliation in Nicaragua. 
Regional negotiations including the United States can be a helpful adjunct to negotiations among the Central American nations and between the Sandinistas and the freedom fighters. They cannot be a substitute. The Central American democracies will speak for themselves about their national interests, and the Sandinistas must negotiate directly with the freedom fighters and the internal opposition to bring about true democracy and national reconciliation in Nicaragua. 
There is a consensus among the Central American democracies—and it's a point often stressed by President Azcona [of Honduras]—that, in this peace process, democracy comes first. Essential steps toward establishing true and secure democratic guarantees must be taken before the other conditions for peace can be met. As President Arias [of Costa Rica] said: "If democracy doesn't take hold in Nicaragua, the armed struggle will continue. The day the Sandinistas or another political movement are chosen freely in elections accepted by all Nicaraguans, there will be no more reason for violence." 
Well, democracy is the key—and one of the best indications of democratic reform is a free press. The Guatemala accord is clear on this point: It doesn't callfor opening only one opposition paper. It calls for complete freedom of the press, radio, and television. The Central American democracies are in compliance with the accord—Nicaragua is nowhere near. So far, only La Prensa is allowed to operate and even it is restricted in reporting military and economic news. Radio Catolica has been forbidden to broadcast news. There is still no independent television broadcasting in Nicaragua, and the many other news outlets remain closed. 
Let me just say here: We have all been very patient in giving the peace process time to work. The Wright-Reagan plan was scheduled to take effect on September 30th. The original deadline for compliance with the Guatemala accord was this week. Now we're told the deadline has been pushed off until mid-January. It's in no one's interest to let this peace process become another round of endless and fruitless negotiations. 
Recently, President Arias was honored with the Nobel Peace Prize for his central role in putting together the Guatemala accord. And I am certain that President Arias saw this as a symbol and inspiration to all those working for peace in this hemisphere. But this noble beginning must have a noble end. In that, the OAS has a special responsibility. For, as I said when I addressed your Ambassadors last month, the OAS has already made a negotiated settlement with the Sandinistas, one that we are duty-bound to keep. In 1979, in an unprecedented action, we helped remove a sitting government and bring the Sandinistas to power. 
As part of that settlement, we promised the people of Nicaragua that we would see to it that their hope of freedom would not be disappointed. We can not walkaway from that promise now. As President Arias has said: We can accept no substitute for democracy in Nicaragua. Only democracy will fulfill our promises to the Nicaraguan people. Only democracy, and nothing less, will bring peace to Central America. 
Today, even as their economy flags at home, the Soviets spend billions to maintain or impose Communist rule abroad, projecting Soviet power by largely military means. Eastern Europe, Cuba, Vietnam, South Yemen, Angola, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Nicaragua, and Afghanistan—the burden must be enormous. But Soviet leaders, who live vastly better than their people, are willing to make that sacrifice because it is only their military might, they know, that gives them superpower status


Radio Address to the Nation on the Supreme Court Nomination of Anthony M. Kennedy, Central America, and Deficit Reduction 
November 14, 1987

The second topic I want to discuss with you is Central America, for it was this week that the Guatemala accord went into effect. As I said Monday in a speech to foreign ministers from Central America, as we look at how the Guatemala accord has been implemented to date, we have to conclude that the differences between the democracies and the Communists in Central America have never been so apparent. The Communists in Nicaragua refuse to lift their state of emergency, but the democracies of El Salvador and Guatemala— countries that are also torn by violence—make no excuses and have no states of emergency. 
In Nicaragua, too, the Communists' release of political prisoners has been partial and grudging. Thousands of political prisoners remain in their jails. Yet there has been one good sign. I welcome the designation of Cardinal Obando y Bravo—a man who himself has suffered much at the hands of the Nicaraguan Communists—as the mediator in Nicaragua between the Communist regime and the democratic resistance, or freedom fighters. This is a Nicaraguan conflict that should be resolved between Nicaraguans. And as I said Monday: When serious negotiations between the Communists and the resistance have begun under Cardinal Obando's mediation, then Secretary Shultz will be ready to meet jointly with the foreign ministers of all five Central American nations, including the Sandinistas' representative. 
But whatever the specific developments in Central America in the coming days, the United States will continue to stress that democracy must come first. As Nobel Prize winner President Arias has said: "The day the Sandinistas or another political movement are chosen freely in elections accepted by all Nicaraguans, there will be no more reason for violence



Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the American Council of Life Insurance 
November 16, 1987

My talks with General Secretary Gorbachev will cover the full range of U.S.-Soviet relations, including human rights, exchanges between our peoples, and Soviet involvement in regional conflicts such as in Afghanistan, Angola, and Nicaragua. I believe that if America remains firm and strong, if we don't give up in squabbles among ourselves things that should be the subject of negotiations with the Soviets, we can usher in a new age of peace and freedom.


Remarks to Administration Supporters at a White House Briefing on Arms Control, Central America, and the Supreme Court 
November 23, 1987

Now, if I may, I'd like to turn to another issue of vital importance: freedom and democracy in Central America. With our aid, the Nicaraguan freedom fighters have made impressive gains in the field and brought the Communist Sandinistas to do something that they never would have done otherwise: negotiate. I hope the Members of our own Congress will not forget this important fact: Without the freedom fighters, there would be no Arias peace plan, there would be nonegotiations and no hope for democracy in Nicaragua. An entrenched, hostile Communist regime in Nicaragua would be an irreversible fact of life, and the Sandinistas would have permanently consolidated and fortified a new Cuba on the American mainland. 
Within the next few weeks, Congress will have to vote on further aid to the freedom fighters. Without that aid, the Sandinistas will know all they have to do is play a waiting game. They'll have no incentive to negotiate, no incentive to make real concessions to fulfill the peace agreement. If Congress pulls the plug on the freedom fighters, they will have accomplished what billions of dollars in Soviet aid could not: extinguishing all hope of freedom in Nicaragua and leaving the neighboring Central American democracies naked to Communist aggression. 
It's the Nicaraguan freedom fighters who brought the Sandinistas to the negotiating table. It is the freedom fighters—and only the freedom fighters—who can keep them there. If we're serious about the peace process, we must keep the freedom fighters alive and strong until they can once again return home to take part in a free and democratic Nicaraguan society. They're brave men, and they've sacrificed much in the cause of freedom, and they deserve no less. There will be few more important votes in Congress than this one, and as I have so often in the past, I'll be counting on your active support. With your help, I know we can win this one



Radio Address to the Nation on Soviet-United States Relations 
November 28, 1987

Regional conflicts represent the third major point in U.S.-Soviet relations, and the American position can be stated very simply: Wherever in the world the Soviets or their clients are seeking to advance their interests by force—in Nicaragua, in Afghanistan, in Angola, in Cambodia, or elsewhere—they must stop and let the people of these countries choose their own destinies. And I can assure you, this will be at the top of my agenda for Mr. Gorbachev. I will remind him that Soviet conduct in these areas remains a major impediment to improved U.S.-Soviet relations.


Remarks at a Luncheon Hosted by the Heritage Foundation 
November 30, 1987

Finally let me just touch on the subject of personal—or of regional, I should say, conflicts. Today, even as their economy flags at home, the Soviets spend billions to maintain or impose Communist rule abroad, from Eastern Europe to Cuba, Cambodia, South Yemen, Angola, Ethiopia, Nicaragua, and Afghanistan. It's estimated that the Soviet war on Afghanistan costs them between $5 billion and $6 billion a year. The Soviet bloc has supplied some $1 billion annually to the Communist Angolans and $2 billion to the Sandinistas in military hardware alone

When I meet with General Secretary Gorbachev, I'm going to ask him: Isn't it time that the Soviet Union put an end to these destructive, wasteful conflicts around the world? Otherwise, there can never be a true glasnost, true openness, between his nation and ours. I'll also make it clear that one of the greatest stumbling blocks to increased cooperation and exchange between our two nations is Soviet support for Communist tyranny in Nicaragua. With our support the Nicaraguan freedom fighters have made impressive gains in the field and brought the Communist Sandinistas to do something that they never would have done otherwise—negotiate. 
If I can turn to the domestic side of this question for a moment, I hope the Members of our own Congress will not forget this important fact: Without the freedom fighters, there would be no Arias peace plan, there would be nonegotiations and no hope for democracy in Nicaragua. An entrenched, hostile, Communist regime in Nicaragua would be an irreversible fact of life. The Sandinistas would have permanently consolidated and fortified a Communist beachhead on the American mainland. 
Within the next month Congress will have to vote on further aid to the freedom fighters. If Congress says no to this aid, the Sandinistas will know that all they have to do is play a waiting game. They will have no incentive to negotiate, no incentive to make real steps toward democracy. 
If we're serious about this peace process, we must keep the freedom fighters alive and strong and viable until they can once again return home to take part in a free and democratic Nicaraguan society. They are brave men, and they have sacrificed much in the cause of freedom, and they deserve no less. There will be few more important votes in Congress than this one and, as I have so often said in the past, I'll be counting on your active support. With your help, I know we can win this one. The fact is, as you all very well know, we have no choice—we have to win this one


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Area High School Seniors in Jacksonville, Florida 
December 1, 1987

I will also say itistime for them to leave Cambodia, Ethiopia, Angola, and Nicaragua. Even as the five Central American countries search for peace, the Soviet bloc continues to pour billions of dollars in guns, planes, bullets, tanks, and other assistance into Nicaragua. Why? To quote one of our leading national strategists, Zbigniew Brzezinski: "Potentially at stake in Central America is America's capacity to defend Western interests throughout the world." And he adds: "If the Soviet-Cuban presence in Nicaragua destabilizes the entire region, the United States will inevitably pull back" from Europe and the Pacific to defend our own border


Interview With Television Network Broadcasters 
December 3, 1987

Well, on our side, our job is to make him see that not only must their troops leave Afghanistan but that the people of Afghanistan, just as the people of Nicaragua, must have theright to determine the government that they're going to have in those countries and not simply accept the present stooges or the Communist world. 
The President. I don't think we could do anything of that kind, because the puppet government that has been left there has a military, and it would be the same as what I'm arguing about with regard to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. You can't suddenly disarm them and leave them prey to the other government—and this is p-r-e-y, not p-r-a-y. No, the people of Afghanistan must be assured of theright of all of them to participate in establishing the government they want, and that requires more than just getting his forces out of there. But I think that we have to look at one other thing here. You spoke of the need for pressure sometimes to get some of the things we want. The pressure on him, and on the Soviet Union, is that that great military power in some almost 8 years has been unable to overpower the freedom fighters there. They're fighting on literally even terms. And it must be quite an embarrassment


Radio Address to the Nation on Deficit Reduction and Soviet-United States Relations 
December 5, 1987

On regional conflicts, the peoples of Nicaragua, Afghanistan, Angola, and Cambodia are entitled to free, independent, and democratically chosen governments. And I will make it unmistakably clear that we view the freedom and independence of Nicaragua—a country on our very own continent-as vital to our own national security. Regarding Afghanistan, the Soviets assure us of their intention to get out. Well, we'll ask them to set a date certain for their withdrawal and talk to the freedom fighters. And I will assure Mr. Gorbachev that the United States will do all it can to help speed a Soviet withdrawal


Address to the Nation on the Soviet-United States Summit Meeting 
December 10, 1987

So, much work lies ahead. Let me explain: On the matter of regional conflicts, I spoke candidly with Mr. Gorbachev on the issues of Afghanistan, Iran-Iraq, Cambodia, Angola, and Nicaragua. I continue to have high hopes—and he assured me that he did too—that we can have real cooperation in resolving regional conflicts on terms that promote peace and freedom. This is essential to a lasting improvement in our relations. 
But let me point out here that, while much work is ahead of us, the progress we've made, especially in arms reduction, does reflect a better understanding between ourselves and the Soviets. It also reflects something deeper. You see, since my first meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev in 1985, I have always regarded you, the American people, as full participants in our discussions. Though it may surprise Mr. Gorbachev to discover that all this time there has been a third party in the room with us, I do firmly believe the principal credit for the patience and persistence that brought success this year belongs to you, the American people.
Your support over these last 7 years has laid the basis for these negotiations. Your support made it possible for us to rebuild our military strength, to liberate Grenada, to strike hard against terrorism in Libya, and more recently to protect our strategic interests and bolster our friends in the Persian Gulf. Your support made possible our policy of helping freedom fighters like those in Afghanistan, Nicaragua, Angola, Cambodia, and other places around the globe. And when last year at Reykjavik I refused Soviet demands that we trade away SDI, our Strategic Defense Initiative that could erect a space shield against ballistic missiles, your overwhelming support made it clear to the Soviet leaders that the American people prefer no deal to a bad deal and will back their President on matters of national security.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With News Editors and Broadcasters 
December 11, 1987

Of course, arms reduction is only one of several significant areas of discussion between the East and West. For example, I made it clear to the General Secretary that the continuing occupation of Afghanistan undermines the progress that we would like to see between our two countries. I also emphasized that there are people fighting for their freedom in many parts of the world. In Nicaragua, freedom fighters face a Communist Sandinista military machine supportive of the Soviet Union. And now is not the time for Congress to turn away from those who are fighting for freedom.

I related to him what our concern is: that anything that—well, it's very similar to Nicaragua—anything that would force us to weaken the freedom fighters in either country at the same time that the governments of those two countries have a military. The Afghan army—it's not only the Soviets that have been fighting. The Afghans have an army in that puppet government. The Sandinistas have a military even while they're pleading and demanding that the contras should disarm themselves


Radio Address to the Nation Following the Soviet-United States Summit Meeting 
December 12, 1987

Finally, we talked directly about regional issues such as Afghanistan, Iran-Iraq, Angola, Cambodia, and Nicaragua. We stressed the urgency of action between our two countries in order to bring more cooperation to our efforts to resolve these conflicts on terms that promote peace and freedom. So, we have a long road to travel. But we've taken important steps, and with your help we'll make that journey


Remarks on Signing the Continuing Appropriations for Fiscal Year 1988 and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 
December 22, 1987

First, funding for those fighting for freedom in Nicaragua will be continued. As the Central American peace plan enters a critical period early next year, it's important that our support for the freedom fighters in Nicaragua not waver, particularly when the Sandinistas have confirmed plans to build up to a 600,000-person military force in that country


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Members of the City Club of Cleveland, Ohio 
January 11, 1988

The President. If aid is cut off to the contras, I have to believe that the actions of the Sandinistas, right down to the present, are such that they are proving that they have no intention of completely accepting the proposed peace agreement. We have, and we think that that could be a solution. But we believe that the only thing that can bring the contras—or bring the Sandinista government, which is a totalitarian Communist government—that can bring it to the negotiating table, is the threat of the contras-who are the people of Nicaragua. 
And I was interested to note this morning that 10,000 Nicaraguan citizens in the capital, in Managua, yesterday demonstrated against the Sandinista government. And maybe the peace process is the reason why they weren't attacked or arrested and thrown into prison, as anyone else doing that has been in the past. But I believe that right now we're asking for nonlethal help to the contras. But I do believe that just as we're helping the people of Afghanistan try to restore freedom to their country, that we—or the Sandinista government is establishing what would be a Soviet satellite state on the soil of the Americas. And I don't think we should tolerate that for one minute


Remarks at the 1988 Reagan Administration Executive Forum 
January 19, 1988

This is also the year that the United States will strongly affirm that democracy, not communism, is the future of Central America. In a few weeks, Congress will determine if we're to provide the democratic resistance in Nicaragua what they need to survive. The Guatemala peace plan can succeed only if the Sandinistas have reason to compromise and institute democratic reforms. We must have the courage to stand behind those who continue to put their lives on the line for democracy in Nicaragua


Remarks to Civic Leaders at a White House Briefing on Aid to the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
January 20, 1988

Thank you all very much, and welcome to the White House. I often like to start this sort of an event with a joke or an anecdote, but somehow I don't think that's appropriate today. The issue we're here to discuss is perhaps one of the most serious we'll have to face and make a decision on. As you know, Congress will he voting soon on continued aid to the democratic resistance forces in Nicaragua, the contras, as they call them, or freedom fighters, as I call them. And if aid doesn't pass, those in Congress who oppose aid to the freedom fighters have made it very plain that they will notallow another vote on this issue to come to the floor. We're at a critical juncture: If Congress votes down aid this time, the decision may well be irrevocable. And if that happens, it's my great fear that we will have abandoned all hope for democracy in Nicaragua and peace in Central America. 
Last weekend the leaders of the five Central American nations met to examine compliance with the Guatemala accord. There's no doubt as to their conclusion: The Sandinistas are the biggest obstacle to fulfillment of the plan and to peace and democracy in that region. While the four Central American democracies are in substantial compliance, the Sandinistas are nowhere near. Even the Sandinistas had to admit as much, issuing a separate declaration that outlined additional steps they felt compelled to announce so as to put their behavior in a better light. 
I want to talk to you today about why we must keep the pressure on the Sandinistas so that they can't reverse course, so they keep walking down that road to democracy. Because each step they have taken, each reluctant reform, is still easily undone. Daniel Ortega has said that his revolution is irreversible. Our goal in Nicaragua must be to make democracy irreversible. 
We welcome the Sandinistas' new promises to abide by the peace plan, and we must hold them to their word. We must make sure that each time the Sandinistas walk through a new door toward democracy we close it behind them—and keep it closed. Only the freedom fighters can do that, only they can be our insurance policy for democracy in Central America. Some say that the freedom fighters are not necessary to keep the pressure on, that the spotlight of world opinion and the Sandinistas' sworn commitment to the Guatemala accord are enough. Well, perhaps it's worth reviewing the historical record to see just how much faith we can put in Sandinista promises. 
As I pointed out in my recent address to the Organization of American States, we already have a negotiated settlement with the Sandinistas—the settlement of 1979—in which the United States, together with the other members of the OAS, took the unprecedented action of withdrawing recognition from a sitting government—the Somoza government—and helped bring the Sandinistas to power. As part of that settlement, the Sandinistas promised—and I'm citing from documents signed by the Sandinistas—"free elections, a broad-based democratic government, full guarantee of human rights, fundamental liberties, freedom of religion, union rights, a mixed economy, an independent foreign policy of nonalignment, and a minimum permanent military corps." 
It's simply stating the obvious to point out that the Sandinistas have not honored a single one of those promises to the other nations of the Organization of American States. What isn't as widely understood, however, is that we now have documented proof that they never intended to. Barely 2 months after assuming power, the Sandinista leadership met secretly to draft a report known as the 72-hour document, outlining their plans to establish a Communist dictatorship in Nicaragua and spread subversion throughout Central America. 
The Sandinistas and their supporters say it was the belligerence of the United States that forced them to go back on their promises, just as they now put all of the blame for their shortcomings on the freedom fighters. But again, let's examine the historical record. Only a day after the Sandinistas finished meeting secretly to draft the 72-hour document, President Carter received Daniel Ortega in the White House and offered his new government our friendship and help. But while we sent the Sandinistas over $100 million in aid—more than any other country—and arranged for hundreds of millions of dollars of loans, the Sandinistas were busy carrying out their plans to eliminate human rights and impose a Marxist totalitarian regime in Nicaragua. 
Six months after the meeting in the White House, while the United States aid was still flowing, several Sandinista comandantes took their first official trip to Moscow, the first of many, and signed a communique with the Soviet Communist Party, expressing support for the foreign policy goals of the Soviet Union. But that, one might say, was merely the paperwork; already Soviet military planners were in Nicaragua. Over 30 new military bases were either built or in the process of construction by the time I came into office in 1981. The Sandinista army was becoming the largest, best supplied in all Central America, and the Sandinistas were already assisting the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador-all while American aid flowed to Nicaragua, while our hand was extended in friendship. 
I could go on to detail the systematic crushing of all human rights, the torture of dissidents, and the swelling population of political prisoners, the tragedy of hundreds of thousands of Nicaraguan refugees flooding into Costa Rica and Honduras—nearly 1 out of every 10 Nicaraguans is now a refugee. But the record of Sandinista totalitarianism is well known by now. The human destruction of communism on the American mainland is well documented and acknowledged by all sides in this debate. My purpose here is to ask a simple question: How can we expect a regime that has compiled such a history of broken promises, of outright deceit, to abide by the terms of the Guatemala accord unless we keep up the pressure by continuing to aid the freedom fighters? 
Recently, Daniel Ortega was up here in Washington talking with Members of Congress, giving them assurances of his commitment to the Guatemala accord. But we know now, from the testimony of a high-level Sandinista defector, Major Roger Miranda, that even while Daniel Ortega was making those promises, the Sandinistas were planning with the Cubans and Soviets to increase their armed forces to 600,000-that's one out of every five men, women, and children in the country. 
Shortly after Major Miranda made his revelations public, Defense Minister Humberto Ortega confirmed them, including Sandinista plans to acquire advanced MiG fighter planes, missiles, and artillery. "Several thousand Nicaraguans," he said, "are now taking courses in the Soviet Union and other Socialist countries to learn to operate the new weapons systems." And the Sandinistas are now developing military facilities that could serve as a launching stage for the Soviet Tu-95 BEAR bomber, a bomber whose range reaches well inside the continental United States. All this, it now turns out, while Daniel Ortega was in the halls of our Congress talking peace. There's a saying I remember from my childhood-and I'm sure you all do, too—that goes "Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me." But what of the third, fourth, and the fifth times? How does one explain such willful gullibility? 
Now the Sandinistas have made more promises. We welcome their promises to lift the state of siege, meet face-to-face with freedom fighters, hold local elections, and release some political prisoners; and we must hold them to those promises. But these limited steps, which still do not bring them into compliance with the Guatemala accord, were taken with extreme reluctance and only after the Sandinistas had been told by certain U.S. Congressmen that failure to do so would result in renewed aid for the freedom fighters. 
Was there ever a better argument for aid? It's only the freedom fighters, and the pressure they've brought to bear on the Sandinistas, that has brought us this far. It's only the freedom fighters that can push the Sandinistas so far down the road to democracy that they never go back. The fact is that even if they carry out the steps they've announced, the Sandinistas are still a long way from compliance with the Guatemala accord. 
Nearly 6 months after signing, nearly 3 months after the agreed-upon deadline for compliance, thousands of political prisoners are in Sandinista prisons and will remain there even under the newly announced partial amnesty. Opposition groups and human rights activists are harassed and beaten by government mobs. Perhaps the best indication of the Sandinistas' true inclinations was the arrest and intimidation last week of seven leaders of the democratic opposition, released only after a storm of international protest. Some in this country talk as if the Sandinistas would reform if we'd just let them alone. But that's not what the Sandinistas themselves say. Just 5 weeks ago, Daniel Ortega made his true intentions clear. Even if there were elections in Nicaragua and the Sandinistas lost, he said, they would never give up power. 
Those who want to cut off funding for the freedom fighters are going to have to explain how Daniel Ortega doesn't really mean what he says. They're going to have to explain that the Sandinistas don't really mean what they say when they talk of turning all of Central America into one "revolutionary fire" and boasting of carrying their fight into Latin America and Mexico. Because right now, what stands between the Sandinistas and their stated intentions, what stands in the way of a Soviet base camp in Central America, are the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. It's clear that it's the freedom fighters, and only the freedom fighters, that have brought the Sandinistas to the negotiating table and have wrung from them the limited reforms they've made. Without the freedom fighters, the hope of democracy in Nicaragua would be lost. The consolidation of totalitarian power would be complete, and the Soviets would have already succeeded in establishing another Cuba—this time on the American mainland. 
The Soviets have made their choice. They and their allies have poured billions of dollars of military aid into Nicaragua, at least 20 times more than the United States Congress has given to the forces of the democratic resistance. Next month the American Congress and the American people will have to make their choice, too. As I said, this is the moment of truth, the make-or-break vote on the freedom fighters. If we abandon them now, if Congress votes down aid, we will be abandoning the only real cause for peace and freedom in Nicaragua. We will be consigning the peace process to an obscure footnote in history and handing the Soviet Union one of its greatest strategic victories since World War II. 
Throughout history, one of our greatest fortunes and greatest strengths as a nation has been that we're protected on either side by two vast oceans. For almost two centuries, we have not experienced the tragedy of foreign aggression on our mainland. And today we can boast that the thousands of miles of borders that separate us and our neighbors lie unarmed and unfortified. Yes, we've been blessed by history, but that should not make us complacent now that a real—and if we don't act to stop it-irreversible danger is developing to our south. 
Imagine the effect on U.S. national security if the Sandinista vision of a Communist Central America is realized and Mexico is threatened. Imagine if, for the first time in this century, we had to concern ourselves with a security threat on our southern border. Imagine our vital sealanes through the Gulf put in jeopardy. The kind of turmoil that exists in the Persian Gulf cannotbeallowed to exist in the Gulf of Mexico. 
It is willfully naive to think the Soviet Union, beset by a crisis in its own economy, would be pouring billions of dollars into a country on the other side of the world if they didn't see great opportunities there. Itistime to realize that the Sandinista Communists and their Soviet mentors are serious people with serious objectives. Itistime we got serious, too. 
This vote will be remembered by the American people either as the time we acted to support freedom and kept our mainland secure or as the beginning of one of America's most tragic mistakes. Of course, the consequences for Latin America would be even worse. An emboldened Communist left would once again step up the offensive in El Salvador, Costa Rica, Guatemala, and Honduras. The tide of democracy would be reversed as the region descended into a cycle of left-wing violence and military repression. Democracy, caught in the crossfire, would not survive long. 
But all this is unnecessary. If we support those fighting for freedom and democracy in Nicaragua, we can keep the peace process on track. We can keep pressure on the Sandinistas to honor the peace plan. We can keep the forward movement of democracy in Latin America safe. And we can prevent the crisis in U.S. national security I described from taking place. 
You know, we've heard a lot about how the freedom fighters will never be an effective fighting force. Well, the latest operation against the Las Minas area disproved that once and for all. Over 7,000 freedom fighters took part in a surprise attack on major military targets and Sandinista gold and silver mines—a source of hard currency for the bankrupt Sandinista economy. In the process, they demolished enemy barracks and overran enemy headquarters. They blew up ammunition dumps and petroleum tanks, destroyed hydroelectric plants, and decommissioned permanently a radar installation the Sandinistas had used to coordinate air strikes against the freedom fighters. 
If the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador mounted such a successful attack, you can imagine the headlines, all the people calling for us to cut our losses and get out, to accept the "will of the people." That the freedom fighters can count [mount] such a major operation, moving thousands of troops in secret throughout the length of the country, demonstrates their support among the Nicaraguan people. With our support, the cause of freedom and democracy can prevail. 
Probably the most important revelation of Major Miranda was the extent of corruption in the Sandinista regime. While the people go ragged and hungry, denied even basic foodstuffs, the Sandinistas milk their country for huge profits. Humberto Ortega alone has skimmed $1 1/2 million and put it into a secret bank account in Switzerland. 
No, it's the corrupt dictators of the Sandinista regime that have no popular support. That's why they must be sustained by billions of dollars of Soviet-bloc aid. The true sentiments of the Nicaraguan people were seen recently when 10,000 people thronged the streets of Managua to demonstrate against the Sandinistas. And believe me, it took real courage for those brave souls to openly defy such a brutal regime. 
The freedom tide that has swept Latin America is pushing up against the borders of Nicaragua. It can go either way, and this vote coming up in 2 weeks will be decisive. We have seen with the recent treaty we signed on INF missiles what we can accomplish if we negotiate from a position of strength. We have seen in Afghanistan how the brave resistance of the Mujahidin is forcing the Soviet Union to look for a political solution. We must keep the pressure on in Nicaragua. We must not let up until democracy has taken such firm root that no one can ever pull it out. 
The majority of the aid that I will be requesting from Congress is for nonlethal assistance to keep the freedom fighters a viable force until democracy is irreversible in Nicaragua. As I said, the Communist Sandinistas have made their choice. Now we must make ours: a future of freedom and democracy for Nicaragua and its neighbors and peace throughout the region, or turmoil, revolution, and unrest, and a steady advance of Soviet military might toward our southern border. That's the choice. There's no middle way. 
Let's make certain that those who come after us say we made theright choice, that when it came time to decide we stood up for freedom and peace—we acted before it was too late, while the costs were still small, to do what was necessary to support democracy and protect the national security of the United States. Thank you all very much, and God bless you


Remarks to Civic Leaders at a White House Briefing on Aid to the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
January 22, 1988

Well, good afternoon, and welcome to the White House. I know that you're going to be briefed today on the situation in Central America, so I thought I'd use our time together not in giving you a great deal of background but, very simply, to tell you why I asked the Congress to provide aid to the Nicaraguan democratic resistance, the freedom fighters. Providing aid to the freedom fighters will do much to decide whether the people of Nicaragua ever possess the liberty that we Americans cherish so much. What I'd like to do is tell you four stories-and they're four true stories. Among them, I believe, they express everything that needs to be said. 
The setting for the first is Managua itself. The date was just 12 days ago, Sunday, January 10th. The event was a march by 10,000 people through the streets of the Nicaraguan capital to mark the 10th anniversary of the death of newspaper publisher Pedro Joaquin Chamorro. Chamorro was killed by gunmen—gunmen believed to have been supporters of the former dictator, Anastasio Somoza. Yet instead of celebrating the Sandinista regime that overthrew Somoza, the marchers demonstrated against the Communist regime. There were chants of "Communists, get out!" One speaker told the crowd, "The people aren't afraid anymore." Another said, "This is the beginning of democracy, and it can't end today." 
By a week ago Sunday, when this march took place, it had been a full 8 1/2 years since the Marxist Sandinistas had overthrown Somoza and established their own regime. We in the United States rightly ask whether the Sandinistas have the support of the Nicaraguan people, and 8 1/2 years is certainly long enough for a people to get to know the true nature of their rulers. Those 10,000 marchers answered our question. Rejection of the Communist regime is not, as some would have it, limited to a few reactionary holdovers from the Somoza years. It runs deep—very deep—among the people themselves. When you hear the second story I'd like to share with you, I think you'll begin to understand why. 
In 1984 Prudencio Baltodano was captured by Sandinista soldiers. His crime? He was an evangelical minister, a man of God. The soldiers bound him to a tree, beat him, then used a bayonet to cut off his ears and slit his throat. The soldiers' commander told them Baltodano wasn't "worth wasting a bullet." "Let him die suffering," the commander said. As they left him bleeding, the soldiers taunted him, "Pray and see if God will save you." 
Well, God did save Prudencio Baltodano, and just last week he was reunited in Washington, here, with his wife and six children. You see, a church in Gaithersburg, Maryland, has sponsored Reverend Baltodano and his family. The church and some other American friends worked to get his wife and children here to the United States from a refugee camp in Costa Rica, to provide them with clothing, and to help them find housing. To me, the help Mr. Baltodano and his family are being given here in the United States is just as important a part of the story as the suffering they endured in Central America. It reminds us that when we see someone in trouble, when we see someone suffering, we Americans reach out to help. And I'm delighted to see Reverend Baltodano here with us. Welcome! 
Well, the people in Nicaragua need our help. That's the meaning of this coming congressional vote. For there can be no doubt that under the Sandinistas the people of Nicaragua are suffering—suffering from the suppression of civil liberties, suffering materially from a national economy that has collapsed under Communist interference and control. It's my firm belief that these are grounds enough for helping the freedom fighters: that when our nation sees neighbors who need help and when it's within our power to extend that help, then it is our duty to do so. Yet as I tell you the third story, you'll see that there is still another reason for us to assist the freedom fighters of Nicaragua. Simply put, the security of Central America and our own nation is at stake. 
On October 25th of last year, a high-level member of the Sandinista staff entered the American Embassy in Mexico City and requested political asylum. Major Roger Miranda had been a top aide to Humberto Ortega. Humberto Ortega is in charge of the Sandinista military and the brother of the President, Daniel Ortega, the leader of the Communist regime in Nicaragua. American officials spent weeks debriefing Major Miranda. And then, last December, he was interviewed by a number of news organizations. When the Sandinistas learned that Major Miranda's revelations would be made public, they apparently decided that they had nothing to lose by admitting to them. At a gathering in Managua, Humberto Ortega confirmed some of Major Miranda's most damaging disclosures. 
Item: In Ortega's own words, Nicaragua has "a few thousand officers in Cuba and the Soviet Union studying the use of sophisticated weapons." 
Item: The Sandinista Communists are training Salvadoran rebels in Managua to use surface-to-air missiles, missiles that could sharply escalate the violence in that country. 
Item: The Communists in Nicaragua have made secret agreements with the Soviet Union, Cuba, and East-bloc nations. Major Miranda stated, and Humberto Ortega publicly confirmed, that these pacts callfor the Soviet Union and its satellites to help the Sandinistas arm and train 600,000 army troops and civilian militia by the mid-1990's. 
Permit me to put that figure into perspective. Six hundred thousand troops will represent one-fifth of the entire population of Nicaragua. It will be as if the United States had Armed Forces of nearly 49 million. But the comparisons with other nations in Central America are more significant. Nicaragua's neighbor to the north, El Salvador, has a population of 5 million, but a military of only some 43,000. Honduras has a population of over 4 ? million, a military of only 14,600. Costa Rica, Nicaragua's neighbor to the south, has a population of 2.6 million and no armed forces. Even Mexico, with a population of over 80 million-by far the largest nation in the region—even Mexico has a military of only some 140,000, less than one-fourth the force of 600,000 that the Communists of Nicaragua plan to have in a matter of only a few years. 
The meaning of what Major Miranda and Humberto Ortega have stated is clear. The Communist regime in Nicaragua represents a threat to the entire region of Central America. And if it represents a threat to the region that adjoins our southern borders, it represents a threat to us. Already, hundreds of thousands of Nicaraguan refugees have left their country. It is by no means difficult to visualize a situation in which hundreds of thousands of Central Americans seek to escape violence and instability by streaming toward the American Southwest. 
My fourth story occurred just last weekend, when the leaders of the five Central American nations met to examine compliance with the Guatemala accord. There's no doubt as to their conclusion: The Sandinistas are the biggest obstacle to fulfillment of the plan and to peace and democracy in the region. While the four Central American democracies are in substantial compliance, the Sandinistas are nowhere near. Even the Sandinistas had to admit as much, issuing a separate declaration that outlined additional steps they felt compelled to announce so as to put their behavior in a better light. 
It is clear, as you can see, why we must keep the pressure on the Sandinistas so that they can't reverse course, so that they keep walking down that road to democracy, because each step they've taken, each reluctant reform, is still easily undone. The Sandinistas have said their revolution will spread. Our goal in Nicaragua must be to make sure it's democracy and freedom that spreads. 
We welcome the Sandinistas' new promises to abide by the peace plan, but we must hold them to their word. We must make sure that each time the Sandinistas walk through a new door toward democracy we close it behind them—and keep it closed. Only the freedom fighters can do that; only they can be our insurance policy for democracy in Central America. 
And let me add something else: Once a cease-fire is in place in Nicaragua and significant progress is being made toward a real and lasting political settlement, the United States is prepared to join in regional security discussions. Our goal is the same as those democracies we've seen emerge in the other Central American countries, the same as those who've been fighting for the freedom they were promised 8 1/2 years ago: an opportunity for all people in that region to have theright to peace, freedom, and democracy. 
Some say that the freedom fighters are not necessary to keep the pressure on, that the spotlight of world opinion and the Sandinistas' sworn commitment to the Guatemala accord are enough. Well, perhaps it's worth reviewing the historical record to see just how much faith we can put in Sandinista promises. As I pointed out in my recent address to the Organization of. American States, we already have a negotiated settlement with the Sandinistas—the settlement of 1979—in which the United States, together with the other members of the OAS, took the unprecedented action of withdrawing recognition from a sitting government—the Somoza government-and helped bring the Sandinistas to power. As part of that settlement, the Sandinistas promised—and I'm citing from documents issued by the Sandinistas—"free elections, a broad-based democratic government, full guarantee of human rights, fundamental liberties, freedom of religion, union rights, a mixed economy, an independent foreign policy of nonalignment, and a minimum permanent military corps." 
Well, it's simply stating the obvious to point out that the Sandinistas have not honored a single one of those promises that they made to all the other states of North and South America. What isn't as widely understood, however, is that we now have documented proof that they never intended to. Barely 2 months after assuming power, the Sandinista leadership met secretly to draft a report known as the 72-hour document, outlining their plans to establish a Communist dictatorship in Nicaragua and spread subversion throughout Central America. 
The Sandinistas and their supporters say it was the belligerence of the United States that forced them to go back on their promises, just as they now put all the blame for their shortcomings on the freedom fighters. Well, again, let's examine the historical record—our belligerence. 
Only a day after the Sandinistas finished meeting secretly to draft the 72-hour document, President Carter received Daniel Ortega in the White House and offered his new government our friendship and help. But while we sent the Sandinistas over $100 million in aid—more than they received from any other country at that time—the Sandinistas were busy carrying out their plans to eliminate human rights and impose a Marxist totalitarian regime in Nicaragua. 
Six months after the meeting in the White House, while U.S. aid was still flowing, several Sandinista comandantes took their first official trip to Moscow—the first of many—and signed a communique with the Soviet Communist Party expressing support for the foreign policy goals of the Soviet Union. But that, one might say, was merely the paperwork. Already, Soviet military planners were in Nicaragua. Over 30 new military bases were either built or in the process of construction by the time I came into office in 1981. The Sandinista army was becoming the largest, best supplied in all Central America, and the Sandinistas were already assisting the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador—all while American aid flowed to Nicaragua, while our hand was extended in friendship. 
Well, I could go on to detail the systematic crushing of all human rights, but my purpose here is to ask a simple question: How can we expect a regime that has compiled such a history of broken promises and corruption to abide by the terms of the Guatemala accord unless we keep up the pressure by continuing the aid to the freedom fighters? 
Some in this country talk as if the Sandinistas would reform if we would just let them alone, but that's not what the Sandinistas themselves say. Just 5 weeks ago, Daniel Ortega made his true intentions clear: Even if there were elections in Nicaragua and the Sandinistas lost, he said, they would never give up power. The Soviets have made their choice. They and the allies have poured billions of dollars of military aid into Nicaragua—at least 20 times more than the U.S. Congress has given to the forces of the democratic resistance. 
In less than 2 weeks, the American Congress and the American people will have to make their choice, too. As I said, this is the moment of truth, the make-or-break vote on the freedom fighters. If we abandon them now, if Congress votes down aid, we will be abandoning the only real cause for peace and freedom and democracy in Nicaragua. 
We have the testimony of brave men and women who are speaking to us of things they've seen and heard, the testimony of the 10,000 who marched in Nicaragua, of Prudencio Baltodano and Major Miranda. The freedom fighters are fighting for all of these and, yes, for us, for our own security


Radio Address to the Nation on Administration Goals 
January 23, 1988

In Central America, the key to peace with freedom is also in the strength of the democratic forces. Some say if you're for aid to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua you're against the peace process. Phooey! Even the Sandinistas admit they're talking peace and democracy because of the freedom fighters. Yet to date, the Sandinistas haven't gone through with one concession to democratize that they can't easily reverse once the pressure of the freedom fighters is off. At stake here is whether Nicaragua becomes a Soviet base camp on the mainland of this hemisphere. Imagine if the Sandinista vision of a Communist Central America is realized and Mexico is threatened. The next vote on aid to the freedom fighters may be the most important this Congress casts. On Monday I'll ask Congress to vote yes



Address Before a Joint Session of Congress on the State of the Union 
January 25, 1988

In Nicaragua the struggle has extra meaning, because that nation is so near our own borders. The recent revelations of a former high-level Sandinista major, Roger Miranda, show us that, even as they talk peace, the Communist Sandinista government of Nicaragua has established plans for a large 600,000-man army. Yet even as these plans are made, the Sandinista regime knows the tide is turning, and the cause of Nicaraguan freedom is riding at its crest. Because of the freedom fighters, who are resisting Communist rule, the Sandinistas have been forced to extend some democratic rights, negotiate with church authorities, and release a few political prisoners. 
The focus is on the Sandinistas, their promises and their actions. There is a consensus among the four Central American democratic Presidents that the Sandinistas have not complied with the plan to bring peace and democracy to all of Central America. The Sandinistas again have promised reforms. Their challenge is to take irreversible steps toward democracy. On Wednesday my request to sustain the freedom fighters will be submitted, which reflects our mutual desire for peace, freedom, and democracy in Nicaragua. I ask Congress to pass this request. Let us be for the people of Nicaragua what Lafayette, Pulaski, and Von Steuben were for our forefathers and the cause of American independence. 
So, too, in Afghanistan, the freedom fighters are the key to peace. We support the Mujahidin. There can be no settlement unless all Soviet troops are removed and the Afghan people are allowed genuine self-determination. I have made my views on this matter known to Mr. Gorbachev. But not just Nicaragua or Afghanistan—yes, everywhere we see a swelling freedom tide across the world: freedom fighters rising up in Cambodia and Angola, fighting and dying for the same democratic liberties we hold sacred. Their cause is our cause: freedom


Remarks to Members of the Reserve Officers Association 
January 27, 1988

Thomas Jefferson once noted, "If a nation expects to be ignorant and free, it expects what never was and never will be." It is up to us then to get the word to our fellow citizens. First and foremost, we've got to inform them about the serious consequences—I would even say catastrophic consequences—of cutting off aid and, thus, pulling the rug out from under the democratic resistance in Nicaragua. 
Today I'm submitting to the Congress my request for $36 million in additional aid for the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. This request ensures that the democratic resistance can keep the pressure on the Sandinistas to comply with the terms of the Guatemala accord for peace and democracy. Ninety percent of the funds is for nonlethal aid, such as food, clothing, medicine, and the means to deliver it. Ten percent is for ammunition. And this part of the request will be suspended until March 31st to determine if the steps taken by the Sandinistas are irreversible steps to democracy in Nicaragua. In reaching this judgment, I will personally consult the Presidents of the four Central American democracies. 
Our approach to the Communist threat in Nicaragua has long been based on a simple principle: diplomacy and pressure in support of freedom and democracy must go hand-in-hand. President Teddy Roosevelt once said, "Diplomacy is utterly useless where there is no force behind it." We've seen the success of this two-track approach elsewhere in the world—in Afghanistan, freedom fighters have forced the Soviet Union to think seriously about a diplomatic solution to that brutal occupation; and in the INF talks, where our decision to deploy intermediate-range missiles a few years ago made possible the agreement I signed this past December. 
This same approach may be working today in Nicaragua, although it's too early to tell if Daniel Ortega's promises will be matched by true efforts to allow democracy to flourish or if these promises are just a repetition of things said for nearly 10 years. It is clear, however, that the pressure of the Nicaraguan freedom fighters has forced the Sandinistas to pull back from aggression against their neighbors and to think twice about their continued domestic repression. 
Although past efforts to restore peace and establish democracy in Nicaragua have invariably failed, I believe we owe it to ourselves and the people of Central America to explore fully diplomatic avenues toward solving the conflict. But only if we have the tools can diplomacy work. Last November, I pledged at the Organization of American States that if serious negotiations between the Nicaraguan resistance and the Sandinista government were underway, I would ask Secretary Shultz to enter regional talks in Central America with the Presidents of all five countries. 
I reiterate that pledge today, and I hope that we may be close to fulfillment of the necessary conditions. The objectives laid out last August in the Guatemala accord and most recently affirmed in San Jose by the five Presidents are consistent with our goals. I will ask Secretary Shultz to pursue them, just as he pursues the security interests of our country and the democracies of Central America. 
We must ask ourselves, however, what will create the conditions for serious negotiations? Recent months have shown clearly that only continued and to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters—aid, I should say—to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters has provided sufficient incentive for the Sandinistas to make concessions, as minimal as those concessions have been. If we remove that incentive-if Congress cuts off aid to the freedom fighters next week—there is little chance that the Sandinistas will bargain seriously. 
I intend to make an all-out diplomatic effort to achieve a negotiated settlement leading to democracy in Central America. But success at the negotiating table depends on continued support for the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. We cannot expect diplomacy to work if we ourselves lack the will to negotiate from a position of strength. We cannot go to the bargaining table empty-handed. And that, in the end, would assure a Marxist-Leninist regime on the American mainland. And I didn't come to Washington to preside over the communization of Central America. 
We must have the will to do what is right and the courage to stand by other free peoples, whether they're Western Europeans in the NATO alliance, Mujahidin insurgents struggling for their national independence, or Nicaraguan freedom fighters who want nothing more than the democratic government they were promised. Such support makes war less likely; it deters aggression. In the case of NATO, it has provided over 40 years of peace for the European Community. In the Third World, our support affirms to all that aggression comes with a heavy price, and that Americans will not sit back idly and watch brave people—like those in Afghanistan and Nicaragua—beaten into submission.


Remarks to the National Conference of State Legislators 
January 29, 1988

Now, it was my intention to focus today on our domestic agenda, but one foreign policy issue has become so important in recent days that I want to share with you my thoughts. That issue, of course, is Central America. Our approach to the Communist threat in Nicaragua has long been based on a simple principle: diplomacy and pressure in support of freedom and democracy must go hand-in-hand. We've seen the success of this two-track approach elsewhere in the world. In Afghanistan, for example, freedom fighters have forced the Soviet Union to think seriously about a diplomatic solution to that brutal occupation. 
This same approach may be working today in Nicaragua, although it's too early to tell if Daniel Ortega's promises will be matched by true efforts to permit genuine democracy. What is unmistakable is this: Democracy has a chance in Nicaragua because of one factor alone—the pressure placed on the Communist Sandinistas by the freedom fighters. 
I believe we owe it to ourselves and the people of Central America to explore fully diplomatic avenues toward solving the Nicaraguan conflict. We must ask ourselves, however, what will create the conditions for serious negotiations? If Congress cuts off aid to the freedom fighters next week, there is little chance that the Sandinistas will bargain seriously. We cannot expect diplomacy to work abroad if here at home we lack the will to negotiate from a position of strength. So, much depends upon this coming vote-the progress of democracy in Latin America and our own security as a nation. I just have to believe that we owe it to the future to stand by the freedom fighters.



Radio Address to the Nation on Aid to the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
January 30, 1988

Yet in the face of this broad and sweeping movement toward human freedom, one country has gone in the opposite direction, away from freedom and toward oppression. That country is Nicaragua. Since the Communist Sandinista regime of Nicaragua took power in 1979, its political opposition has been subjected to constant harassment. Freedom of the press was replaced by state censorship. Communist control of the economy has produced hyperinflation and a standard of living that is now nothing short of desperate. Perhaps the most telling fact of all is this: Some 250,000 Nicaraguans, over 10 percent of the entire population, have fled the country. 
It would be one thing if Nicaragua, bad as it is, were self-contained. Yet the actual case is much worse. For the Communist regime has placed Nicaragua within the Soviet orbit, embarked upon a massive military buildup, and already begun to send arms and guerrillas into neighboring countries. First, El Salvador, then Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica—the Communist Sandinistas have sought to extend violence throughout all of Central America. It could be only a matter of time before serious unrest and instability reached Mexico. Were that to happen, the decade of the nineties could open with hundreds of thousands of refugees streaming toward our own southern borders. 
Yet people in Central America have themselves moved to prevent this threat from becoming a reality. First among these are the Nicaraguan freedom fighters. These brave men and women have given up ordinary life to endure the hardship of living in the countryside—virtually always on the move—to fight for freedom in their own country. There was a time when the freedom fighters, with few supplies, little medical support, and dwindling ammunition, were forced to retreat. But in recent months, in large measure because we in the United States have stood with them, the freedom fighters have begun to win major victories, placing intense pressure upon the Communist Sandinista regime to reform. 
Outside Communist Nicaragua, the democratic leaders of neighboring Central American countries have worked together to develop a peace plan for the region. Among its provisions, the peace plan calls for all the countries of Central America, including Nicaragua, to respect civil liberties, including freedom of the press and freedom to hold elections. 
The Communist regime in Nicaragua-which, as I've said, is under intense pressure from the freedom fighters—has agreed to participate in the regional peace process. So far, the measures the Communists have taken have been extremely limited—the release of a small number of political prisoners, for example, and the lifting of censorship in a very few eases. Yet there is hope that, with the freedom fighters keeping up the pressure, the Communists will observe still further provisions of the peace plan, permitting Nicaragua at least to inch toward the conditions of genuine democracy. 
The United States has made every effort to promote a negotiated solution. Since 1981 we have met with the Sandinistas ourselves—bilaterally, multilaterally, and in other diplomatic settings. Four special United States envoys have traveled to the region on at least 40 occasions. Yet it remains vital for us to help the freedom fighters keep the Communist Sandinistas under pressure. 
Next week Congress will vote on my request for additional aid for the Nicaraguan resistance. Ninety percent of the $36 million package is for nonlethal support, such as food, clothing, medicine, and the means to deliver those items. Only $3.6 million is for ammunition, and its delivery would be suspended for at least a month to determine whether progress is being made toward a cease-fire. I'm hopeful that will occur, and the ammunition will not be required. 
However, if the Sandinistas fail to move forward on the path of peace and democracy, then I will certify to Congress that these supplies must be released. I will make that decision only after the most careful and thorough consultation with Congress and the four Central American democratic Presidents. Those brave freedom fighters cannot be left unarmed against Communist tyranny


Remarks at the Annual Convention of the National Religious Broadcasters Association 
February 1, 1988

There's something else I need your help on, and that's getting Congress to stand by its commitment to the cause of freedom and against the consolidation of a Communist regime in Nicaragua. In approving $100 million in aid to the freedom fighters in 1986, Congress laid down certain preconditions for renewing aid this year, including remindments [requirements] that the freedom fighters demonstrate that they are a proficient fighting force and that they show they have popular backing. Well, in truth, many who voted for those conditions believed there was no way the freedom fighters could meet them, not in the short time they had. They thought they'd found an easy way to get out of further support without taking blame. But the freedom fighters met those conditions. 
We're told that the Sandinistas have at last made hopeful confessions—concessions, I should say— [laughter] —they could well make some confessions— [laughter] —so more aid would be counterproductive. The problem here is what we've seen over and over again: that the Sandinistas stick to their word only if it's convenient or they're threatened. In 1979, when the Sandinistas came to power with American help, they pledged to President Carter that they would install a pluralistic, democratic government. But even as they were making that promise, they were drafting a blueprint for rule—what is now called the 72-hour document because it came out of a secret 3-day meeting. In it they said that the broad coalition government was only a front to, in their words, "neutralize Yankee intervention." 
In other words, the coalition and the promises about democracy the Sandinistas made to the Organization of American States and to us were falsehoods, lies. And we swallowed them. We gave the Sandinistas $118 million over the next 18 months, even as they brought in Soviet and Cuban advisers, began supplying Communist guerrillas in El Salvador and elsewhere, and started to install Communist tyranny in Nicaragua. 
The falsehoods have continued. Just over a week ago, I received a letter from Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega in which he said that Nicaragua allows "the full and unrestricted exercise of freedom of speech, debate, and association." Well, just about the time that letter arrived at the White House, in Nicaragua, Sandinista thugs attacked a meeting of mothers of political prisoners. 
In October 1 raised this issue of promises broken when I addressed the Organization of American States. I was particularly concerned about the promises made in 1979 to bring democracy to Nicaragua. A month later, from the same platform, Daniel Ortega replied to me. He said that the pledges of democracy, of individual liberty, of a mixed economy, of freedom of press and religion were—here's his word: "inexistent." Why? Because a political pledge did not have—again from his speech to the OAS—"the force of a legal commitment." Well, he should have been a Hollywood producer. No, so one question must be answered: Sandinista promises of the past have been broken; can we believe them now? 
The Sandinista steps toward peace and democratization can be reversed once the pressure from the freedom fighters is removed. The five democratic Presidents of Central America affirmed just weeks ago that the Sandinistas have failed to comply with the regional peace plan. Indeed, the Sandinistas haven't made one concession on their own without a threat hanging over them. And again and again the Sandinistas have shown themselves students of what Lenin said: that "telling the truth is a bourgeois prejudice." It's just this simple: The way to democracy and peace in Nicaragua is to keep the pressure on the Sandinistas taking irreversible steps to comply with the regional peace plan, and giving aid to the freedom fighters now. 
You know, the more objections I hear from our critics about aid to the freedom fighters, the more I think of the story of that fellow who went into the Army. I bet you were wondering when I would get to a story. [Laughter] The fellow spent hours in boot camp on the firing range learning to shoot. And when he was done with boot camp, they gave him one of those medals that says Marksman on it. He went home-very proud—on leave, and near the edge of town he saw somebody's homemade firing range—a wall, and on the wall lots of chalked bull's-eyes, and in the middle of every bull's-eye a bullet hole. Well, he wanted to see who could shoot like that, and finally he tracked him down—a 7-yearold boy. And he asked the boy, "How did you do that?" The boy answered, "I take my gun; I line up my sights; and I pull the trigger. Then I take my chalk, and I draw a circle around the hole." [Laughter] 
Well, that's how on target the criticisms of aid to the freedom fighters are. Itistime for us to face why, even as the five Central American countries search for peace, the Soviet-bloc continues to pour billions in tanks, bullets, and other assistance into Nicaragua. To quote one of our leading national strategists, Zbigniew Brzezinski: "Potentially at stake in Central America is America's capacity to defend Western interests throughout the world." And he adds: "If the Soviet-Cuban presence in Nicaragua destabilizes the entire region, the United States will inevitably pull back" from Europe and the Pacific to defend our border. Our choice is whether to remove U.S. assistance to the freedom fighters, but is there any discussion about removing' Soviet assistance to the Sandinista regime? 
But there's something more than security at stake: freedom. Religious persecution under the Communist Sandinistas has been persistent and often brutal—Jews, Catholics, evangelical Christians, and others—all have suffered. Perhaps you know the story of Prudencio Baltodano, a father, a farmer, and an evangelical man of God. Sandinista soldiers tied him to a tree, struck him in the forehead with a rifle butt, stabbed him in the neck with a bayonet, and then cut off his ears. "See if your God will save you," they jeered as they left him for dead. Well, God did save Prudencio Baltodano. He found his way to Costa Rica and then to the United States. Recently his wife and children were located in a refugee camp in Costa Rica, and through the efforts of the church located here in the Washington area, the family was reunited here in the United States. And Prudencio Baltodano is with us today. Senor Baltodano. 
Let me tell you one other story of Sandinista religious repression. I mentioned Campus Crusade for Christ earlier. In late 1985 the Crusade's national director for Nicaragua, Jimmy Hassan, was arrested. For hours, he was harassed, questioned, and put in a tiny cell, questioned again, placed in a cold room, questioned yet again, and had a gun put to his head and the trigger pulled. Thank goodness the gun was empty. The reason for all this: He had been preaching the Gospel to young people. But that's not why I'm telling you his story. No, I thought you'd want to hear his account of what he said to one of his captors when, after hours of interrogation and humiliation, he was released: "I said to him I wanted to leave it clear that as a Christian I loved him, and I wanted him to know Christ." 



Address to the Nation on Aid to the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
February 2, 1988

Now, this is a map of Central America. As I said, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, and Costa Rica are all friendly and democratic. In their midst, however, lies a threat that could reverse the democratic tide and plunge the region into a cycle of chaos and subversion. That is the Communist regime in Nicaragua called the Sandinistas, a regime whose allies range from Communist dictator Fidel Castro of Cuba to terrorist-supporter Qadhafi of Libya. But their most important ally is the Soviet Union. 
With Cuban and Soviet-bloc aid, Nicaragua is being transformed into a beachhead for aggression against the United States. It is the first step in a strategy to dominate the entire region of Central America and threaten Mexico and the Panama Canal. That's why the cause of freedom in Central America is united with our national security. That is why the safety of democracy to our south so directly affects the safety of our own nation. 
But the people of Nicaragua love freedom just as much as those in El Salvador. You see, when it became clear the direction the Sandinistas were taking, many who had fought against the old dictatorship literally took to the hills; and like the French resistance that fought the Nazis in World War II, they have been fighting the Communist Sandinistas ever since. 
These are the forces of the democratic resistance. The Communist government named them contras, but the truth is they're freedom fighters. Their tenacious struggle has helped buy the surrounding democracies precious time, and with their heroic efforts, they are helping give freedom a chance in Nicaragua. A year-and-a-half ago, Congress first approved significant military aid for the freedom fighters. Since then they've been winning major victories in the field and doing what many at first thought impossible: bringing the Communist Sandinistas to the negotiating table and forcing them to negotiate seriously. 
From the beginning, the United States has made every effort to negotiate a peace settlement—bilaterally, multilaterally, in other diplomatic settings. My envoys have traveled to the region on at least 40 different occasions. But until this last year, these negotiations dragged on fruitlessly, because the Sandinistas had no incentive to change. Last August, however, with mounting pressure from the freedom fighters, the Sandinistas signed the Guatemala peace plan. 
This time, the leaders of the four Central American democracies refused to let the peace negotiations become an empty exercise. When Nicaragua missed the second deadline for compliance, the democratic leaders courageously stood as one to insist that the Sandinistas live up to their signed commitments to democratic reform. Their failure to do so, said the democratic leaders, was the biggest obstacle to peace in the region. The Sandinistas are clearly feeling the pressure and are beginning to take limited steps. Yet at this crucial moment, there are those who want to cut off assistance to the freedom fighters and take the pressure off. 
Tomorrow the House of Representatives will be voting on a $36 million bill, a support package to the freedom fighters. Ninety percent is for nonlethal support, such as food, clothing, and medicine, and the means to deliver it. Ten percent is for ammunition. That amount will be suspended until March 31st to determine whether the Sandinistas are taking irreversible steps toward democracy. I'm hopeful this will occur. However, if there is no progress toward a negotiated cease-fire, I'll make a decision to release these additional supplies, but only after weighing carefully and thoroughly the advice from Congress and the democratic Presidents of Central America. 
Now, over the past several days, I've met with many Members of Congress, Republicans and Democrats, concerning my proposal. In the spirit of bipartisanship, I will, tomorrow, send a letter to the congressional leadership taking a further step. At the appropriate time, I will invite Congress to act by what is called a sense of Congress resolution on the question of whether the Government of Nicaragua is in compliance with the San Jose declaration. If Congress adopts such a resolution within 10 days containing this finding, then I will honor this action and withhold deliveries of ammunition in this package. 
One thing is clear: Those brave freedom fighters cannot be left unarmed against Communist tyranny. Now, some say that military supplies aren't necessary, that humanitarian aid is enough. But there's nothing humanitarian about asking people to go up against Soviet helicopter gunships with nothing more than boots and bandages. There's no vote scheduled tomorrow in the Soviet Union on continued assistance to the Sandinistas. That assistance will continue, and it won't be just humanitarian. 
Our policy of negotiations backed by the freedom fighters is working. Like the brave freedom fighters in Afghanistan who have faced down the Soviet Army and convinced the Soviet Union that it must negotiate its withdrawal from their country, the freedom fighters in Nicaragua can win the day for democracy in Central America. But our support is needed now; tomorrow will be too late. If we cut them off, the freedom fighters will soon begin to wither as an effective force. Then with the pressure lifted, the Sandinistas will be free to continue the consolidation of their totalitarian regime-the military buildup—inside Nicaragua, and Communist subversion of their neighbors. 
Even today, with the spotlight of world opinion focused on the peace process, the Sandinistas openly boast that they are arming and training Salvadoran guerrillas. We know that the Sandinistas, who talk of a revolution without borders reaching to Mexico, have already infiltrated guerrillas into neighboring countries. Imagine what they'll do if the pressure is lifted. What will be our response as the ranks of the guerrillas in El Salvador, Guatemala, even Honduras and unarmed Costa Rica, begin to swell and those fragile democracies are ripped apart by the strain? By then the freedom fighters will be disbanded, refugees, or worse. They won't be able to come back. 
Let me explain why this should be and would be such a tragedy, such a danger to our national security. If we return to the map for a moment, we can see the strategic location of Nicaragua—close to our southern border, within striking distance of the Panama Canal. Domination of Central America would be an unprecedented strategic victory for the Soviet Union and its allies, and they're willing to pay for it. Cubans are now in Nicaragua constructing military facilities, flying combat missions, and helping run the secret police. The Soviet Union and Soviet-bloc countries have sent over $4 billion in arms and military aid and economic aid—20 times the amount that the United States has provided the democratic freedom fighters. If Congress votes tomorrow against aid, our assistance will very quickly come to an end, but Soviet deliveries won't. 
We must ask ourselves why the Soviet Union, beset by an economic crisis at home, is spending billions of dollars to subsidize the military buildup in Nicaragua. Backed by some 2,000 Cuban and Soviet-bloc advisers, the Sandinista military is the largest Central America has ever seen. Warsaw Pact engineers are completing a deep-water port on the Caribbean coast similar to the naval base in Cuba for Soviet submarines. And the recently expanded airfields outside Managua can handle any aircraft in the Soviet arsenal, including the Bear bomber, whose 5,200-mile range covers most of the continental United States. 
But this is only the beginning. Last October a high-ranking Sandinista officer, Roger Miranda, defected to this country, bringing with him a series of 5-year plans—drawn up among the Sandinistas, Soviets, and Cubans—for a massive military buildup in Nicaragua extending through 1995. These plans, which Major Miranda makes clear are to be put into effect whether the freedom fighters receive aid or not, callfor quadrupling the Sandinista armed forces to 600,000 or one out of every five men, women, and children in the country. 
As I speak to you tonight, several thousand Nicaraguans are taking courses in the Soviet Union and Cuba to learn to operate new high-tech missiles, artillery, and other advanced weapons systems. Of grave concern is the fact that the Soviets have scheduled delivery of Soviet MIG aircraft to Nicaragua. Now, if these were just the claims of one defector, no matter how highly placed and credible, some might still find reason to doubt. But even before Major Miranda's revolutions [revelations] were made public, his old boss, Defense Minister Humberto Ortega, confirmed them in a public speech, adding that if Nicaragua chose to acquire MIG's it was none of our business. The introduction of MIG's into Nicaragua would be so serious an escalation that members of both parties in the Congress have said the United States simply cannot tolerate it. 
The Miranda revelations can't help but make us skeptical of the recent Sandinista promises to abide by the Guatemala peace accord. The argument is made that the freedom fighters are unnecessary, that we can trust the Sandinistas to keep their word. Can we? It's important to remember that we already have a negotiated settlement with the Sandinistas: the settlement of 1979 that helped bring them to power, in which they promised, in writing, democracy, human rights, and a nonaligned foreign policy. 
Of course, they haven't kept a single one of those promises, and we now know that they never intended to. Barely 2 months after assuming power, the Sandinista leadership drafted a secret report called the 72-hour document, outlining their plans to establish a Communist dictatorship in Nicaragua and spread subversion throughout Central America. This is the document in which they detailed their deception. It is now part of the public record, available for all to see. 
One day after that 72-hour meeting, President Carter, unaware of their secret plans, received Daniel Ortega here in the White House and offered his new government our friendship and help, sending over $100 million in aid—more than any other country at the time—and arranging for millions more in loans. The Sandinistas say it was U.S. belligerence that drove them into the hands of the Soviets—some belligerence. A short while later, the Sandinista comandantes made their first official trip to Moscow and signed a communique expressing support for the foreign policy goals of the Soviet Union. But that, one might say, was only the paperwork. Already, Soviet military planners were in Nicaragua, and the Sandinista subversion of El Salvador had begun—all while our hand was extended in friendship. 
This is not a record that gives one much faith in Sandinista promises. Recently, Daniel Ortega was up in Washington again, this time talking to Members of Congress, giving them assurances of his commitment to the Guatemala peace process. But we now know that at the same time, back in Managua, the Sandinistas were drawing up plans for a massive military escalation in Nicaragua and aggression against their neighbors. Now, as the Sandinistas see the vote on aid to the freedom fighters nearing, they are making more promises. Well, forgive my skepticism, but I kind of feel that every time they start making promises-like that fellow in the Isuzu commercial-there should be subtitles under them telling the real story. 
One may hope they're sincere this time, but it hardly seems wise to stake the future of Central America and the national security of the United States on it. The freedom fighters are our insurance policy in case the Sandinistas once again go back on their word. The Sandinistas themselves admit that the limited steps they have taken to comply with the peace accords were promised in order to influence the vote in Congress. Was there ever a better argument for aid? 
Even now, with the entire world watching, the Sandinistas have harassed and beaten human rights activists and arrested several leaders of the peaceful democratic opposition, including the editor of La Prensa. Before being interrogated, some were sealed for over an hour in metal lockers, 3 feet square on the floor and 7 feet high. Said one comandante of the opposition: "They are scorpions. They should return to their holes, or we will crush them." 
Just a short while ago, the Sandinistas made their true intentions clear. Even if they were forced to hold elections and lost, they said they would never give up power. Responding to the estimate that the Sandinistas have no more than 15-percent popular support, another comandante responded by saying: "That's all right. We can hold on to power with only 5 percent." Now, these are not the words, these are not the actions, of democratic reformers. 
Those who want to cut off the freedom fighters must explain why we should believe the promises the Sandinista Communists make trying to influence Congress, but not the threats they make at home. They must explain why we should listen to them when they promise peace and not when they talk of turning all Central America into one "revolutionary fire" and boast of carrying their fight to Latin America and Mexico. 
If we cut off aid to the freedom fighters, then the Sandinistas can go back to their old ways. Then the negotiations can become, once again, what they were before: high-blown words and promises and convenient cover, while the Sandinista Communists continue the consolidation of their dictatorial regime and the subversion of Central America. During the last vote in Congress, many who voted for aid to the freedom fighters set conditions on further assistance. They said the freedom fighters must broaden their leadership; they have. They said the freedom fighters must show that they are a viable fighting force and win support from the people. Well, the latest victory in the Las Minas area proved that. 
For several weeks, nearly 7,000 freedom fighters maneuvered in secret throughout the country—something they could only have done with support of the population. In one of the largest military operations in Nicaraguan history, they overran enemy headquarters, routed army barracks, blew up ammunition dumps, petroleum tanks, and other military targets. At one point, they captured a warehouse where grain was being hoarded for the army. The freedom fighters opened the doors and invited the hungry people of the area to take what they needed. 
The freedom fighters are inside Nicaragua today because we made a commitment to them. They have done what Congress asked: They have proven their effectiveness. Can we, as a moral people, a moral nation, withdraw that commitment now and leave them at the mercy of the Sandinista regime or turn them forever into refugees-refugees from the country for which they are making such a heroic sacrifice? 
What message will that send to the world, to our allies and friends in freedom? What message will it send to our adversaries-that America is a fair-weather friend, an unreliable ally? Don't count on us, because we may not be there to back you up when the going gets a little rough. 
By fighting to win back their country, the freedom fighters are preventing the permanent consolidation of a Soviet military presence on the American mainland. By fighting for their freedom, they're helping to protect our national security. We owe them our thanks, not abandonment. 
Some talk of containment, but we must not repeat the mistake we made in Cuba. If containment didn't work for that island nation, how much less effective will it be for an expansionist Soviet ally on the American mainland. I will tell you truthfully tonight: There will be no second chances tomorrow. If Congress votes down aid, the freedom fighters may soon be gone, and with them all effective pressure on the Sandinistas. 
Our goal in Nicaragua is simple: peace and democracy. Our policy has consistently supported the efforts of those who seek democracy throughout Central America and who recognize that the freedom fighters are essential to that process. So, my fellow Americans, there can be no mistake about this vote: It is up or down for Central America. It is win or lose for peace and freedom. It is yes or no to America's national security. 


Radio Address to the Nation on Drug Abuse and Aid to the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
February 6, 1988

Just this week we saw Congress divided on my request for continued assistance to those fighting for freedom in Nicaragua. Both sides claim their goal to be peace and democracy in Central America; the argument is over how to achieve it. To my disappointment, the House of Representatives voted to remove military pressure from the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua. The Senate agreed with me, that we cannot leave the democratic resistance in that country to the mercy of that Communist regime and expect the Sandinistas to democratize out of the goodness of their hearts. 
All of this has serious implications for our country's national security and, no less important, has grave implications for those brave souls who are fighting for democracy in Nicaragua—people who trusted us. Their fate, the fate of democracy, and our own security interests depend on the next steps we take


Remarks at the Annual Conservative Political Action Conference Dinner 
February 11, 1988

What I would like to see is for some of those who've been praising our INF treaty to show they've learned its true lesson and vote to maintain an adequate defense budget, our work on a strategic defense against ballistic missiles, and yes, aid to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua


Toast at a Luncheon Hosted by President Miguel De la Madrid Hurtado in Mazatlan, Mexico 
February 13, 1988

Our first responsibility to our citizens is to assure them an environment where they can raise their families in peace and freedom and prosperity. And that is why ourcommitment to democracy in our hemisphere must be unshakable. Totalitarian societies-such as those in the Soviet Union, Cuba, and now Nicaragua—have demonstrated for all to see that tyranny doesn't work. Mexico and the United States have a common interest in stable, free, and democratic governments in this hemisphere. I would hope this common interest will manifest itself in a common stand against the expansion of totalitarianism


The President's News Conference
February 24, 1988
There's another regional conflict that has serious implications for our country's security interests: Nicaragua. Our policy consistently has been to bring peace and freedom to all of Central America. Today four of the five Central American countries choose their governments in free and open democratic elections. Independent courts protect their human rights, and their people can hope for a better life for themselves and their children. One country, Nicaragua, with its Communist regime, remains a threat to this democratic tide in the region. 
So, our message to the people of Nicaragua tonight is the same as it has been for the past 7 years: freedom based on true democratic principles. In the past several months, there have been some limited steps taken by the Communist regime in Nicaragua toward reform. Now is not the time to reverse that process. 
So, there's no argument that all of us seek peace and democracy in Nicaragua, and the difference is how to achieve that goal. On February 3d, Congress voted on continued support for the democratic resistance in Nicaragua, and to my disappointment, the majority in the House of Representatives voted to remove the pressure of the democratic resistance on the Sandinista regime. However, the Senate agreed with me that we cannot leave those fighting for freedom in Nicaragua at the mercy of the Communist regime and expect the process toward democracy to move ahead. 
We've already seen what happens when pressure is removed. In just 2 short weeks, the Sandinistas threatened the only free press in that country and rejected a cease-fire proposal made by the mediator, Cardinal Obando, which incorporated the essential elements laid out and agreed to last August. And in the first 2 months of 1988, Soviet military assistance to Nicaragua has almost doubled, compared to the same period in 1987. These do not represent signs of peace; these remain troubling indications of a regime determined to crush its opposition and threaten its neighbors. 
There is a choice. We mustact to ensure that freedom is not smothered in Nicaragua and to guarantee that these latest promises will be kept in a timely way.


Radio Address to the Nation on Drug Abuse and Aid to the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
February 27, 1988

We want everyone to have the opportunity for a productive, meaningful life. That also requires our country to be secure, which is why we've been so concerned about events in Central America. Democracy has been progressing in that region, but one area where totalitarianism has a foothold could well undo all that's been accomplished. Nicaragua, with its Communist regime, represses its own people and threatens its neighbors. Well, if there's any lesson we've learned, it is that freedom and peace go hand in hand, so it is imperative we see democratic progress in Nicaragua. And in the past several months, under pressure from the democratic resistance, there have been some limited reforms there. 
On February 3d, to my disappointment, however, the majority in the House of Representatives voted to remove pressure for further democratic reform. The Senate, on the other hand, agreed with me that we cannot leave those fighting for freedom in Nicaragua at the mercy of the Communist regime and expect the process toward democracy to move ahead. 
And already we can see warning signs. In just 2 short weeks, the Sandinistas threatened the only free press in the country and rejected a cease-fire proposal which incorporated the essential elements laid out and agreed to last August. And in the first 2 months of 1988, Soviet military assistance to Nicaragua has almost doubled, compared to the same period in 1987. These are serious matters, and it's not time for wishful thinking. We must face reality in Central America, or we will face the consequences. We must have a policy, everywhere in the world, based on realism and strength


Remarks at the Annual Leadership Conference of the American Legion 
February 29, 1988

Today the people of Afghanistan are setting an example for all of us—of courage, heroism, and strength. I can assure you: We will not let them down. We will not agree to any steps that put the Afghan freedom fighters or Afghan hopes for self-determination at risk. And the fact there's progress now in the Afghan diplomacy—because we stood by our friends—should teach a lesson in another similar situation closer to home. As you know, Congress will be voting again on continued aid to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. I hope Members of Congress will remember one thing: Those freedom fighters are inside Nicaragua today, because we made a commitment to them. Are we going to cut them off now and leave them defenseless against the Sandinistas? If we do, who will ever trust in the United States of America again? How long can we remain a world power if we gain a reputation for pulling the plug on the people who have placed their trust in us, people fighting for their own freedom and for our national security? 
Before the last vote, I warned Congress: You may cut off aid to the freedom fighters, but Soviet deliveries to the Sandinistas won't stop. And in fact, Soviet military assistance to the Sandinistas was nearly doubled in the first 2 months of this year compared to the same period in 1987. Congressional opponents of aid argued that the peace process would flourish and the Sandinistas would democratize if we cut off our assistance to the freedom fighters. Well, it's been 3 weeks, and exactly the opposite has happened. 
Cardinal Obando y Bravo was forced to suspend the most recent round of peace talks because of Sandinista obstructionism. And Sandinista rhetoric has become ever more warlike, full of promises to crush the resistance. And the Sandinistas continue to tighten their grip on the suffering country-threatening La Prensa; sending out the government directed turbas, or mobs, to harass dissidents; and expanding their system of political prisons. That's the Sandinistas for you. At the same time they promise a general amnesty, they're building more political prisons. They've gone from 2 to 16 prisons. 
Recently a document was found on a Communist terrorist killed in battle in El Salvador. And let me quote a few lines: "The defeat of the contras would be a grave strategic defeat for the United States," it says, and goes on, "The failure of the contras and the acceptance of the Nicaraguan revolution for the United States can be a total global strategic change." I could not have said it better myself, except to add, of course, that this total global change will not be in our favor. Unless the freedom fighters remain a viable force, the peace process will quickly become what it was before: an empty charade, dragging endlessly and fruitlessly on, while the Soviets continue their military buildup on the American mainland. 
The American people are watching, and Congress knows it. And some say they're willing to support some type of humanitarian aid but are doing everything they can do to disband the freedom fighters. But there's nothing humanitarian about asking people to go up against Soviet attack helicopters armed only with boots and bandages. Whatever package emerges from the Congress must include a provision for expedited procedures that would allow us to request additional military aid to the freedom fighters should the peace process break down. 
We will not leave the freedom fighters to be picked off one by one—picked off by Sandinistas heavily equipped by the Soviet Union. With our help, the freedom fighters have been winning major victories in the field. With our help, they can keep the pressure on the Sandinistas to force them to democratize. 
Preventing the consolidation of a pro-Soviet regime on the American mainland is a crucial test of national security. If Central America goes Communist, it would be a setback for America of incalculable proportions. I won't stake the future of the Western Hemisphere on Sandinista promises. There is no alternative: United States security demands a free and democratic Nicaragua. Nothing less will do. And let me just add that I'm aware of the Legion's tremendous support for our Central America policy, and I just want you to know I thank you from the bottom of my heart. 


Remarks to Reporters Following the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Summit Meeting in Brussels, Belgium
March 3, 1988

The President. He concerns me by just being there


Remarks at the Annual Conference of the Veterans of Foreign Wars 
March 7, 1988

Today as veterans you're still defending freedom. Whether it's supporting adequate defense budgets or aid to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua or teaching America's young people the meaning of our precious rights through your Voice of Democracy program, the members of the VFW are still on the front lines, still leading the charge, and still showing what true patriotism really means. That's why when you sound the bugle this is one old rider in the horse cavalry who snaps to attention


Interview With Alastair Burnet of ITN Television of the United Kingdom 
March 10, 1988

The President. Oh, yes, because I think there are other things. Our negotiations at the summit meetings and our discussions have been on a number of things—not only the arms control but the regional problems, Afghanistan, Nicaragua, things of that kind, and also human rights. We believe that that is of great importance if the relations between our countries is to improve, that there must be some solution to these things that we think are such violations of human rights. And we've made progress in all of our meetings on all of these subjects. And so, I'm looking forward to the summit. It will be nice if we have reached a point at which, as we did here, we could sign that treaty. But if not, I think we would continue to discuss it, make progress, and eventually come to a signing


Interview With Dieter Kronzucker of ZDF Television of the Federal Republic of Germany 
March 10, 1988

The President. Well, we have achieved some results with them, because mainly we have talked about regionalism, things like Afghanistan and Nicaragua and so forth. We've talked about human rights and the violation there and what an effect that has on our trying to improve relations with each other. And we have made gains. There has been a softening in their position on human rights, and they have freed political prisoners and so forth. We think they have a long way to go to meet our standard of human rights. And also, we see now his determination to leave Afghanistan. So, no, we talk about all those differences that are between us as well as the arms matters. And obviously we've made progress now in that with the treaty that has already been signed and the one that is being negotiated now


Remarks to Supporters of Israel at a White House Briefing on United States Foreign Policy 
March 15, 1988

And as most of you know, few regimes today so blatantly sanction and practice official anti-Semitism as the Sandinista Communists in Nicaragua. The Jewish community has been forced out almost entirely. Managua's one synagogue has been defaced and firebombed. And Nicaragua has officially aligned itself with Mu'ammar Qadhafi of Libya and of course the PLO, an organization that has again revealed its true colors, opposing our efforts of peace and trumpeting its responsibility for a sickening terrorist attack on a bus carrying Israeli men, women, and children. It's no accident that Sandinista leaders were trained in the seventies by the PLO, and the PLO has established a presence in Nicaragua. So, too, one of the hijackers some years ago of an El Al airliner was a Sandinista. He died in the attempt and is now a national hero. They have named a geothermal plant after him. And of course, the Sandinistas have led the way in sponsoring recent anti-Israel resolutions in the U.N. 
So, I think itistime that some in Congress who want to turn away from the reality of left-wing anti-Semitism face the facts about the anti-Semitism of the Sandinistas as well as their ties to the PLO and other terrorist groups. It is the Nicaraguan freedom fighters who are resisting this kind of moral corruption. It is the freedom fighters who are fighting for the political, civil, and human rights of Jews and Christians in Nicaragua. It is the freedom fighters who must be sustained and supported in this struggle. 
You know, I just don't understand the inability of some people to realize what the Sandinistas are all about. Only the other day we saw newspaper accounts of the Castro connection in international drug dealing. So, too, the evidence has been compelling for a long time that the Sandinistas have been involved in such drug trafficking. In one of my TV addresses on the subject of contra aid, I showed a picture of a drug smuggler's aircraft landing in Nicaragua at a military airfield and being met by Nicaraguan officials and soldiers. And the Commission on Organized Crime, chaired by Judge Irving Kaufman, concluded that top-level members of the Sandinista leadership were involved in the international drug trade. Well, anyway, the point that I'm making here is that all of us have a stake in what happens in Nicaragua as we do in the fate of Central America in general. 
You know, many people early on said that we could not save El Salvador, and our aid package passed by only a few votes. And now democracy is prospering in El Salvador, Honduras, Costa Rica, and Guatemala. Nicaragua is the odd man out and a menace to the cause of regional democracy. But the struggle in Nicaragua goes on, and with Congress' help, we'll see to it that democracy wins there too



Radio Address to the Nation on the Deployment of United States Forces to Honduras and the Strategic Defense Initiative 
March 19, 1988

However, in one Central American nation, Nicaragua, the cause of freedom is in grave peril. Up until the end of last month, the United States had been aiding the freedom fighters who've been trying to restore democracy by resisting the regime of Soviet-backed Sandinista Communists. However, just as the heroic efforts of the democratic resistance have forced the Communists to cut back on their aggression abroad and to make peace concessions, the Congress, in a close vote, decided to cut off aid to the freedom fighters. 
Since the Congress rejected our package of assistance for those fighting for freedom in Nicaragua, the Communist dictators have done exactly as we predicted. Instead of giving peace a chance, the aid cutoff is giving the Communist dictators a chance—a chance they long hoped for, a chance to smash their opponents. They have hardened their negotiating position. They have fired the mediator, Cardinal Obando y Bravo. They have sent mobs of thugs against peaceful opposition groups. And now, instead of negotiating for a cease-fire, they have launched a major military assault on the weakened contras, invading democratic Honduras in the process. 
Now, from the beginning, our Central American policy has been designed to prevent another Cuba and to let the people of Nicaragua win back their freedom and their independence from the Soviet Union on their own, to do this without having to commit American military personnel. But now, because of Congress' aid cutoff last month, the Sandinistas have mounted their major cross-border incursion into Honduras. In response, and at the request of President Azcona, we have sent American military units to Honduras to conduct an emergency readiness exercise. Our purpose is to send a signal to the Governments and peoples of Central America about the seriousness with which we view the situation. 
The freedom fighters are in desperate need of support. If they are to remain a viable and effective force, they must have assistance now. There is not a moment to spare. If urgently needed help does not reach them soon, we face the prospect of a collapse of the democratic resistance, the attendant consolidation of a Marxist-Leninist regime in Nicaragua, and an increased threat to Nicaragua's democratic neighbors. Ultimately, we will face a national security crisis of the first order and an enormous human tragedy


Remarks to the House of Representatives Republican Conference 
March 22, 1988

This incursion is no mere political mistake by the Sandinistas. It is part of a broad offensive that is both military and political. It is meant to deliver a knockout blow to the democratic resistance. And rather than pointing the way to more democracy, the cutoff of aid has also been followed by more harassment and oppression in Nicaragua-including attacks with rocks, chains, and pipes by Sandinista-sponsored mobs on political demonstrations; the harassment of opposition journalists; and not-so-veiled threats to the opposition parties. Rarely has a political proposition been tested so fully and conclusively. Opponents of our package of aid to the freedom fighters said that little or no assistance would mean more democracy and less war, but just the opposite has occurred. 
The truth about Nicaragua is getting out. Early last week, for example, I spoke to major contributors to the United Jewish Appeal and got a warm response when I talked about Sandinista anti-Semitism and Sandinista ties to drugs, Castro, and terrorism. I mentioned that Sandinista leaders had been trained by the PLO, and the one hijacker who died in a PLO hijacking of an El Al airline was a Sandinista who now has a powerplant named after him in Nicaragua. I mentioned the attacks on Managua's only synagogue. And I mentioned, too, the line from the Commission on Organized Crime report tying members of the Sandinista leadership to international drug trafficking.


Remarks to State and Local Republican Officials on Federalism and Aid to the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 22, 1988

One final note, if I may. It's on a subject that concerns State and local officials and every American—every citizen who cherishes our freedom and shares a concern for our national security. I'm talking about the crisis developing in Nicaragua. No, crisis is not too strong a term. Those who voted to cut off aid to the freedom fighters claimed it would bring peace to Nicaragua. We pleaded with them that abandoning our friends in the region was no way to bring peace. We warned that even though we cut off the freedom fighters the Soviets would continue their massive aid to the Communists. And as I pointed out in my press conference, Soviet military aid to the Communist Sandinista regime doubled in the first 2 months of this year compared to last year. Well, our worst fears have come to pass. Only 7 weeks after the first vote in Congress, the Sandinista Communists have launched an offensive against the freedom fighters, hoping to deliver a killer blow before anyone can come to their rescue. The freedom fighters, with all aid cut off, sit trapped inside Nicaragua, prey for the Sandinistas and their Soviet-supplied weapons. Who can't but question whether the only plan that Daniel Ortega ever intended for the democratic resistance was their elimination? 
The House leadership, who played hardball to win the vote to cut off aid, now says it will notaccept [originally “won’t accept;” changed for Yoshikoder” responsibility for the destruction of the freedom fighters. Well, if the freedom fighters are extinguished and Communist rule is consolidated in Nicaragua, the American people will be the ones to decide who is responsible. Congress must immediately redress the grave mistake they've made and send aid urgently to the freedom fighters before it's too late. In every forum available to you, with your constituents and with your Representatives in the Congress, make your feelings on this issue known, and do it now because soon it may well be too late



Remarks at a Fund-raising Reception for Senator Chic Hecht of Nevada 
March 22, 1988

Now I'd like to turn to a matter that shows just how critical it is to put Chic and men and women like him in the next Congress. I'm talking about Central America and the situation in Nicaragua. Last week's Sandinista attack on Honduras was greeted by too many in Congress not as the proof that funding the freedom fighters is the one way—the only way—to get the Sandinistas to the peace table and keep them there. No, one Senator spoke for too many when he shook his head about the political mistake of those in Managua—as if they'd stumbled in some primary or caucus. 
Well, maybe if these critics thought for a moment, they'd just see what the nature of this so-called mistake really was. Troop movements, small-team reconnaissance missions, the positioning of fuel and supplies-in short, the logistical preparations for the incursion—began just after Congress voted to reject our package of aid to the democratic resistance. We saw it happening. This was a precise and carefully prepared operation that showed the influence of outside advisers and must have required several weeks to plan. It was not some spontaneous Sunday afternoon outing. 
In other words, counting back to when we first saw logistical preparations commence and before that to when planning would have had to start, this invasion was beginning or underway even as, in late February, a group of liberal House Democrats sent a letter to anti-aid lobbyists saying that, in their words: "Nothing will bring peace faster than destroying contra hopes for more military aid." This was the same period in which we were warning that an end to congressional aid would set back, not advance, the cause of peace and democracy in Nicaragua. 
Preparations for the incursion were continuing when Sandinista mobs were breaking up peaceful demonstrations in Managua-something they'd eased off on as the congressional vote on aid to the freedom fighters approached—but this time their attacks showed a savagery that had rarely been displayed before, as thugs pounded demonstrators with clubs and metal bars. And believe me, they did not just do this to their fellow men. They did it to groups of women and ladies who were simply walking in the streets and protesting various things the Sandinistas were doing. The stage for the attack was set even before Daniel Ortega fired the peace mediator, Cardinal Obando y Bravo, and boasted he was going to crush the contras. 
Well, now we know he had reason to believe he could. The attack he knew was approaching involved multiple combat battalions, thousands of troops, and the close support of MI-17 and MI-25 attack helicopters-Soviet craft. Were the signs of danger ever clearer? Yet throughout this time our critics were saying over and over that only by stopping aid would we give the peace process a chance. I'm not questioning the sincerity of our critics, only their judgment.


Informal Exchange With Reporters Prior to a Meeting With President Joaquin Balaguer Ricardo of the Dominican Republic 
March 25, 1988

President Reagan. Well, I only have to say, of course, that we've looked forward to this and hope it continues. But, I still think that—just as in some other meetings that have gone on in which I've been involved-I think that we should keep in mind that both parties must be dedicated to the things that are said and agreed to at those meetings. 
President Reagan. I think there's reason to have caution. They have a past record that indicates that we should be.



Remarks Following Discussions With President Joaquin Balaguer Ricardo of the Dominican Republic 
March 25, 1988

Sharing a common hemisphere and democratic beliefs, we examined important political developments elsewhere in the Caribbean and Latin America. We are both concerned by recent events in Central America and Panama. I deeply appreciate President Balaguer's insights into these issues. We both hope for democratic and peaceful solutions to the problems of the region. We want to see an end to the pursuit of military solutions and to the massive Soviet armament that fuels that pursuit. I congratulated the President on his government's role in hosting the first Nicaraguan peace talks mediated by Cardinal Obando y Bravo. We discussed bilateral cooperation in the critical area of narcotics. I want personally to thank President Balaguer for his assistance in combating illegal narcotics in the Caribbean. His government's efforts have been crucial, and we look forward to continued cooperation on this matter of national and hemispheric security

























