MID 204901, US v China, 13 apr to 13-May-57 to 13-Jun-57





86 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on the Cost of Their Government.
May 14, 1957

Without counting the Chinese Communists, the Soviets have the world's largest army. They have many times the number of submarines that Germany had when World War II began. They have atomic weapons and rockets and missiles. They have a large and growing air strength. They are competent in military technology and research. And all this is directed by a despotism which is fully capable of the supreme folly--that of unleashing these powerful forces if it should ever believe that it could--without destroying itself--succeed in destroying the free world



105 - The President's News Conference
June 5, 1957

In the first instance, there is nothing in this particular case that would in itself require a reassessment of our relationships with the so-called two Chinas. 
With respect to the trade, there is a law on the books, I believe, preventing all shipments of American property to Red China. So long as that law is on the books, of course, that is that. 
Now, there is a very great division of opinion in America, as there is in the world, about the value of trade with Communists. There is--we have had this subject up here before--there is one school of thought that thinks any trade with the Communist countries is bound to be to their benefit; whereas there is another school of thought that thinks that the Yankee, for example, is a very fine trader, and that we got to be a great country by trade; and they assert that trade in itself is the greatest weapon in the hands of a diplomat, and if skillfully used, it can be used as a very great instrument of governmental policy. 
In this case the argument or the point at issue has been over the last many months, should we maintain the differential between the shipments allowable to the western part of the Communist area in Eurasia, and the eastern part. 
Those that argue for the elimination quote several things. First, that it is foolish to say China can't have something, and then you ship it to Russia and it can go on through. The opposing argument is that they have to do that and use up their transportation space; that costs them some money. 
Another argument on the side of the liberalizing of this trade is that Japan, our friend, must make a living. She can't trade all around the world because too many people have some kind of bars. 
Here in this country, as you know, there is constant agitation to set up bars against textiles and light machinery, and all that sort of thing. 
Where is she going to trade? All right. They say we want Japan for our friend, 95 million of people; she must be allowed to trade somewhere; and, therefore, we ought to liberalize the trade with China. 
The other side says if you let that happen, the next thing you know you are going to have Japan communized. 
So it is that kind of an argument, going into numbers of factors, that goes on all the time. 
Now, frankly, I am personally of the school that believes that trade, in the long run, cannot be stopped. You are going to have either just authorized trade or you are going to have clandestine trade. You can stop the shipments from here. That is on the law, and that will be continued as long as it is on the law. 
But whether or not it should be, whether we should eliminate this differential, frankly, I don't see as much advantage in maintaining the differential as some people do, although I have never advocated its complete elimination






