MID 103901, US v USSR, 20 jul to 19-Aug-70 to 26-Sep-70




227 - The President's News Conference
July 20, 1970

Third, I have indicated that the Soviet movement not just of weapons but of men to Vietnam [sic] to man the weapons causes us concern because if that continues that could upset the balance of power. It has not yet been upset, as the Secretary, of State has said, but we are watching it closely because if the balance of power is upset then that would have the effect of leading nations on both sides possibly to takeaction which would lead to another
war. 
I further pointed out that as far as the Soviet Union was concerned and the United States is concerned that we both wanted to avoid a confrontation, we want to avoid a confrontation every place in the world. We want to avoid it in Europe, we want to avoid it in Southeast Asia, and we want to avoid it in the Mideast. And that an arms escalation, and particularly the insertion of troops, men, into the Mideast increases the risks of a confrontation, a confrontation that neither side wants. That is why we are putting such emphasis on our peace initiative. That is why we have not announced any sale of planes or delivery of planes to Israel at this time, because we want to give that peace initiative every chance to succeed



230 - Remarks of Welcome to President Urho Kekkonen of the Republic of Finland.
July 23, 1970

In this connection we express appreciation to you and your people for being the host to the historic conference on limitation of strategic arms in Helsinki. We trust that this conference may lead to an historic agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union which could contribute to the cause of peace for generations to come


240 - The President's News Conference
July 30, 1970

THE PRESIDENT. Well, we have certainly no intention of disarming. What we are talking about in the SALT negotiations is not disarmament but a limitation of arms where we limit what we do and they limit what they do. And the very thing that you refer to makes it very important for us to pursue those negotiation, because the Soviet Union, since 1967, for example, when we stopped any deployment of land-based missiles, since that time, has deployed 724 ICBM's, either SS-9's or SS-13's. 
Since that time when we launched our last nuclear submarine with missile-carrying capabilities, the Soviet Union has deployed 13 more. And by 1975, assuming they continue their present building pace, they will catch up with us in nuclear submarines. 
We can either continue this race in which they continue their offensive missiles and we go forward with our defensive missiles, or we can reach an agreement. That is why at this point we have hopes of attempting to find, either on a comprehensive basis, and lacking a comprehensive basis, a selective basis, the first steps toward which the superpowers will limit the development of, and particularly the deployment of more instruments of destruction when both have enough to destroy each other many times over
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I would first react by saying that if there is a war between the Soviet Union and the United States, there will be no winners, there will be only losers. The Soviet Union knows this and we know that. 
That is the reason why it is vitally important that in areas like the Mideast that we attempt to avoid to the greatest extent possible being dragged into a confrontation by smaller powers, even though our interests in the area are very, very great. That is why it is very much in our interests in the SALT talks to work out an arrangement if we can, one which will provide for the interests of both and yet not be in derogation of the necessity of our having sufficiency and their having sufficiency. 
One other point I would make briefly is this: What the Soviet Union needs in terms of military preparedness is different from what we need. They are a land power primarily, with a great potential enemy on the east. We are primarily, of course, a sea power and our needs, therefore, are different. But what is important now is to find a way to stop this escalation of arms on both sides, and that is why we have hopes in the SALT talks which, I emphasize again, do not involve disarmament for the United States or the Soviet Union, but do involve a limitation and then eventually a mutual reduction



241 - Remarks to Reporters Announcing Acceptance by Middle East Nations of United States Cease-Fire Proposal
July 31, 1970

For our part, we have been engaged since early 1969 in cooperative efforts with the Governments of the Soviet Union, Great Britain, and France to help move the Middle East conflict toward a peaceful settlement. We expect these efforts to continue. We firmly believe, however, that the focus of future efforts must be on the parties directly concerned under the auspices of Ambassador Jarring's mission. We wish him and the parties well in their efforts, and we stand ready to help whenever and wherever we can



296 - Remarks at a Citizenship Day Reception in Chicago, Illinois.
September 17, 1970

I was just running over the list of people who have been in the history of this country--recent history--very big men in the Nation, and who came from other lands. One of the great industrialists and one of the greatest inventive geniuses of our times--creative men--is David Sarnoff. He was born in Russia. He came to the United States from Russia





