MID 221501, US v USSR, 28 apr to 28-May-58 to 7-Jul-58




88 - The President's News Conference
April 30, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't know what these reports are that you are mentioning. We have taken no new official position since the London conferences of last year when, in company with our associates, we presented to the Soviets a very, what we thought, comprehensive and sensible disarmament program and particularly pointed out how we thought beginnings toward it could be taken. As you know, those were refused by the Soviets. 
We have been under a considerable amount of correspondence with them but there is no general change in the program
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I will say this: I think that my reaction to Mr. Gromyko's speech this time was not irritation or resentment or even a defensive feeling because of his charge. It was rather that of sadness. 
This proposal was made as seriously and as honestly as it could be made by the United States--I mean this specific proposal this moment. It has always been a part of a larger proposal, as you know, but this specific proposal was because of their charge that they were running risks and there was greater danger because of the alerting practices of our Air force. 
So, in order to allay those fears, to make it so that each of us could believe that this one great strategic route across the Pole and across the Arctic regions could be denied or at least examined, we proposed this as a way of allaying the suspicion about this alerting of our planes, and at the same time thought that it could probably be accepted by them as so sensible and so easy to do that maybe we could use it as the first step toward an agreement between ourselves that, having been successful, might lead on to something better. 
So, as I say, to think that in this we were just trying to score a propaganda point, well, to my mind it's just--almost silly to talk of it in that way. It was a very serious proposition, and I still hope that they would reconsider their opinion on it



95 - Remarks at 14th Annual Washington Conference of the Advertising Council.
May 6, 1958

While we believed then they were concentrating more on the military threat, yet now we see the Soviets at least partially blocked in their readiness to threaten weaker nations with military power and to bring about an uneasiness and unstable political situation in neighboring smaller countries. They turn more and more to the economic, the political, the propaganda types of invasion of these other countries

Now since this economic invasion of the Soviets has started, we calculate something over two billion dollars has been sent by them in credits abroad, at very low rates of interest--two percent and so on. But more than that, they are showing a greater and greater readiness to indulge just in barter trade. And in barter trade, since they can set their price any way they want, any time they want, and under any conditions, we are handicapped unless we take hold of this problem in the most sensible, logical and comprehensive way we possibly can


96 - Address at Republican National Committee Dinner in Honor of the Republican Members of Congress.
May 6, 1958

Now in recognition of the soundness of the free world's military defenses, the Soviets have lately turned more and more from military to economic assaults on free world positions. So, while the need for military assistance remains--yet for all of us--the economic side of mutual security becomes day by day more essential to the common defense. That includes the security and freedom of every person listening tonight. 
Since 1953 the communists have signed almost 100 trade agreements with the less developed nations. They have loaned those nations some $2 billion, at interest rates enticingly favorable.
Now these developments are very significant. 
Throughout the Asian and African continents, vast reserves of human energy and natural resources are opening up in a way that has not happened for centuries. Knowing this--knowing also the Soviet maneuvers I just mentioned--we must make a fateful decision.
And so in trade too our choice is clear: we will have reciprocity, or we will have retaliation. And I wholeheartedly choose the former. In passing, may I remind you that fifty years ago reciprocity was eloquently supported by a great Republican President--William McKinley. Now, how does all this relate to the Soviet menace? 
This way: if in their new economic offensive the Soviets, by using trade and aid, can bring free nations one by one into their orbit, they will as surely have paved the way for communist control of the world as if they had conquered those nations by force



141 - The President's News Conference
June 18, 1958

And, finally, the execution of Nagy and Maleter. I cannot think of any incident that could have and has more shocked the civilized world. These two men were not guilty of evil doing. They were fighting for their own country, to eliminate or to reduce the domination by force of their country on the part of the Soviets. Good faith was violated in their execution, the story of which has just come to our attention in this country. 
It is clear evidence that the intent of the Soviets is to pursue their own policies of terror and intimidation in any way they choose, to bring about complete subservience to their will. 
I think there is no incident that should have more alerted the free world to the lack of confidence that we are compelled to feel in the words and actions of these Communist imperialists. I am ready for questions
THE PRESIDENT. Well I think I should like to answer that question in this way: there has been a very great feeling in the free world that possibly we have been reluctant to acknowledge that the Soviets were more ready to negotiate, and to negotiate in good faith. 
The news from the free world today is that the revulsion that people are feeling everywhere is evidenced in a number of places, in a number of countries--picketing or demonstrating in front of Soviet Embassies and so on. 
So I would say anything of this kind that shocks the whole free world, its whole conscience and its whole beliefs, is detrimental to fruitful negotiations.
THE PRESIDENT. I will help. I would give aid to anything that I would think would help to weaken the solidarity of the Communist bloc. 
If we can set up centrifugal as opposed to centripetal forces, we are, in my mind, doing a great service for the free world. And, through trade, through possibilities for these people--I suppose, the ones we are talking about now are Poland and Yugoslavia--if they can make stronger their independent action, vis-a-vis the Soviets, that is all to the good. 
It has often been said, you know, that trade follows a flag; it's entirely possible, too, that the flag tends to follow trade; and there could be some trading in this way that would awaken new interest in these countries to pull away from Moscow. I think to that extent we would be advantaged





153 - The President's News Conference
July 2, 1958

Now, the cases that come up are not similar in their circumstances. for example, the case in Russia, the case in East Germany, the one in China are entirely different from the one in Cuba. Here it is a dissident portion of the nation which, alleging that this country--and I might say inaccurately--but, nevertheless, alleging that this country has been giving improper support to the government of Cuba, has taken these individuals apparently as hostages to secure some kind of accommodation or support for themselves

THE PRESIDENT. No. I would certainly be unable to give any accurate estimate of their motives. 
Frankly, it is difficult to understand, sometimes, exactly what they mean, and sometimes I think it may be translating difficulties because we get expressions that do not seem to have meanings that we would normally give to similar expressions. 
What we did was this: believing that at the very last minute a conference of this kind should not be abandoned--it was, we thought, a very bad thing to do in our international relations--we sent our people on, knowing at the very least we would show seriousness and earnestness in our effort to do our part of solving the problem that was laid before the technical committee. 
Moreover, it seemed to us dear that even conversations among our technical friends from friendly countries would bring about possibly a broader and better understanding on our own part for anything in the future. 
When the Soviet scientists appeared, we were very pleased; and rather than to express any criticism at this moment, I would like to express a word of hope that from this there may be some kind of understanding that can lead along a little bit to a next one









