MID 128604, US v USSR, 15 feb to 17-Mar-51 v 24-Nov-51



49 - The President's News Conference
March 1, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. Of course I haven't, because I don't know about it yet. Maybe it will come to me during the day



56 - The President's News Conference at Key West
March 15, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I can't answer that question




59 - Address Opening the Meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics.
March 26, 1951

Today, these principles are under relentless attack from a center of power which denies the whole concept of human freedom-whether it be spiritual freedom, or economic freedom, or political freedom. 
Communist imperialism attacks and undermines national independence and international cooperation. In their place, it substitutes the rule of force. Communist imperialism also seeks to destroy the system of government that serves the welfare of the people. Instead, it sets up a system under which the people exist only to serve the purposes of the government. As a result the Soviet system is one of unbridled power, imposing slavery at home and aggression abroad. 
The aggressive expansion of the Soviet power threatens the whole world. In Europe we see it trying to engulf the nations from which we have drawn our cultural beginnings. If Soviet subversion and Soviet armed force were to overthrow these nations, the consequences for all of us in the Western Hemisphere would be disastrous. We would lose those cultural and religious ties which mean so much to us. The international trade on which we are so dependent would be violently disrupted. Worst of all, we would be confronted by a hostile power on the shores of the Atlantic, capable of using the great economic resources of our conquered friends to strike across the ocean at our own independence. 
We must not and will not let that happen. We in the Western Hemisphere must help the free men of Europe who are resisting Soviet expansion. 
In the Far East, Communist imperialism presents us with another threat. There we see many new nations emerging, as our own countries once did, from colonial status to full independence. For these new nations we of the Western Hemisphere have the greatest feeling of fellowship. But Communist imperialism has fallen upon these new nations with its weapons of internal subversion and external attack. It seeks to overpower them before they are strong enough to stand alone. 
If Soviet communism were to be successful in this venture, it would be a terrible blow to the bright promise of the principles of freedom and peace which we uphold. The great manpower of Asia would become one of the instruments of the aggressive expansion of the Soviet system toward our own hemisphere.

We know that people are very much alike in their basic aspirations wherever they may be or whatever language they may speak. We recognize that the people of Russia, the people of the Soviet satellite states, are very much like us in what they want for themselves and for their children. We hope that some day they will find it possible to turn their leaden from their present path of tyranny and aggression



70 - The President's News Conference
April 5, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. It is just as great as it ever has been. We were faced with that in the Berlin airlift. We were faced with it in Greece and Turkey. We were faced with it in Iran, when the troops of the Allies and Russia moved out of Iran. We were faced with it in Korea as an actual fact on June 25th. That situation has been a dangerous one for the last 5 years--last 4 years, I will say



78 - Radio Report to the American People on Korea and on U.S. Policy in the Far East.
April 11, 1951

This is a lesson that most people in this country have learned thoroughly. This is the basic reason why we joined in creating the United Nations. And, since the end of World War II, we have been putting that lesson into practice--we have been working with other free nations to check the aggressive designs of the Soviet Union before they can result in a third world war

The whole Communist imperialism is back of the attack on peace in the Far East. It was the Soviet Union that trained and equipped the North Koreans for aggression. The Chinese Communists massed 44 well-trained and well-equipped divisions on the Korean frontier. These were the troops they threw into battle when the North Korean Communists were beaten

The dangers are great. Make no mistake about it. Behind the North Koreans and Chinese Communists in the front lines stand additional millions of Chinese soldiers. And behind the Chinese stand the tanks, the planes, the submarines, the soldiers, and the scheming rulers of the Soviet Union

Second, the free world as a whole is growing in military strength every day. In the United States, in Western Europe, and throughout the world, free men are alert to the Soviet threat and are building their defenses. This may. discourage the Communist rulers from continuing the war in Korea--and from undertaking new acts of aggression elsewhere



80 - Address at the Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner.
April 14, 1951

They say it will provoke Russia to attack if we send troops to Europe--but they are sure Russia won't be provoked if we carry the war to China. It has been categorically stated that Russia will not come in if we bomb Manchuria. The statement was made to me about the Chinese not coming into Korea, and it was made on good authority, too, and I believed it. 
They say they are worried because the Russians outnumber us--but they are not interested in keeping allies who can help us
For 5 years we have been checking and countering the threats of Communist expansion-all around the world. We have been helping to strengthen free nations to stand up and resist this pressure. Our policy thwarted the Soviet master plan of expansion. So the Communist leaders resorted to open aggression

If the Communist leaders have learned the lesson that aggression will not be tolerated by the free nations of the world, it should be possible to reach a peaceful settlement in Korea. But it must be settled on a basis that will protect the objectives for which the United Nations are fighting. 
To reach such a settlement the Soviet and Chinese Communist leaders must abandon their aggression. 
On that point there can be no compromise. 
We will not engage in appeasement. 
We will make no deals that would reward aggression. 
Let there be no mistake in the Kremlin. We want peace--in Korea and in the rest of the world. But we will not give in to aggression. 
We know that appeasement does not lead to peace. Appeasement leads to war. Our efforts to prevent war must be founded upon the preservation of freedom and justice





95 - The President's News Conference
May 3, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. Not that I know of. All I have seen about opinions like that have been in the press, and I like to have them from the source before I comment on them

THE PRESIDENT. He is entitled to that opinion--he is entitled to any opinion he chooses. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I have no opinion to express. My opinions have been in action




96 - Address at a Dinner of the Civil Defense Conference.
May 7, 1951

Because there was an atomic explosion in the Soviet Union in 1949, we mustact on the assumption that they do have atomic bombs. 
They have planes that could drop atomic bombs upon our cities. 
No matter how good our air defense may be, or how big an air force we build, a determined air attack by the Soviet Union could drop bombs upon this country. Our air force experts say planes would get through, however good our defenses may be
The fight against aggression in Korea has also dealt a heavy blow to the Kremlin conspiracy outside of Asia. It has brought new hope and courage to free men in Europe, and in the Middle East, who face the Soviet menace across their frontiers. The fight against Communist aggression in the Far East is the fight against Communist aggression in the West and in the whole world as well. 
Meanwhile, the strength of all the free nations is growing. The Soviet plan of world conquest is becoming more and more impossible to achieve. If we stick to our guns, and continue to punish the aggressors, we can end the aggression in Korea and restore peace.
Furthermore, a deep involvement on our part in a war in China, whatever the outcome there, would have critical military consequences in Europe. There is nothing that would give the Kremlin greater satisfaction than to see our resources committed to an all-out struggle in Asia, leaving Europe exposed to the Soviet armies. 
But there are other dangers. The Kremlin is trying, and has been trying for a long time, to drive a wedge between us and the other free nations. It wants to see us isolated. It wants to see us distrusted. It wants to see us feared and hated by our allies
If we go it alone in Asia, we may destroy the unity of the free nations against aggression. Our European allies are nearer to Russia than we are. They are in far greater danger. If we act without regard to the danger that faces them, they may act without regard to the dangers that we face. Going it alone brought the world to the disaster of World War II. We cannot go it alone in Asia and go it in company in Europe. The whole idea of going it alone is the opposite of everything we have stood for since World War II. Going it alone in Asia might wreck the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty, and the whole system of collective security we are helping to set up
That would be a tremendous victory for the Soviet Union. 
We do not intend to fall into that trap. I do not propose to strip this country of its allies in the face of Soviet danger. 
Some people do not understand how the free world can ever win this long struggle without fighting a third world war. These people overlook the inner weaknesses of the Soviet dictatorship. They forget that the free world is stronger--stronger in its determination, stronger in its staying power, stronger in its human resources--than any [p.269] system of slavery under a totalitarian dictatorship. 
The Kremlin's system of terror, which appears to be its main strength, is one of its greatest weaknesses. Dictatorships are based on fear. They cannot give their people happiness and peace. They have nothing to offer except aggression and slavery. 
As the aggressive tactics of the Kremlin are checked by the collective defenses of a free world, the futility of the whole Communist program is becoming more and more apparent to the people under Soviet control. 
Yugoslavia has thrown off the Kremlin yoke. Every day refugees flee across the border from the Iron Curtain countries into the free countries of Europe. 
There are growing signs of internal tension and unrest behind the Iron Curtain. 
We must remember that the peoples under the Soviet rule of terror are not only our friends but our allies. They are victims of a terrible tyranny. We do not hate them. We have had friendly relations with them in the past, and we can have such friendship again. 
As the free nations build their strength and unity, this fact will compel a change in the Soviet drive for power and conquest. The Soviet rulers are faced with the growing strength of the free world, the increasing cost of aggression, and the increasing difficulty of driving their people to greater and greater hardships. They will be forced by these pressures from within and without to give up aggression. It will then be possible to make progress with a program for international control and the reduction of armaments and for the peaceful settlement of disputes




98 - Remarks at a Conference of the Industry Advisory Councils of the Department of the Interior.
May 9, 1951

But peace in Korea will not put an end to the global danger of Soviet aggression. We must build up enough military strength-enough military strength actually in existence-to convince the Kremlin that it ought not to start a world war. 
We must prepare ourselves to mobilize quickly for war in case the Kremlin is reckless enough, in spite of everything, to plunge the world into a general conflict
The people of the United States, together with the people of the other free countries can win a victory in the struggle with Soviet communism. I'm just as sure of that as I'm sure I am standing here




116 - Remarks at the Dedication of the Carter Barron Amphitheater.
May 25, 1951

Faith and free government have always been opposed by dictatorships. Today it is being threatened by a new and terrible tyranny. Hitler and Mussolini never had anything to match the terrible secret police of the Kremlin. The situation in Russia is almost fantastic. Nobody there can go to bed without the fear that the secret police may come in the night and take them away, never to be seen again. The Soviet is extending this slave system to the countries they now control. 
In Eastern Germany--and I have this on the authority of no less a person than the Bishop of Eastern Berlin, who paid me a visit not very long ago--in Eastern Germany, thousands of persons have been kidnapped by the secret police. They just disappear, and are never heard of again. They kidnap the children between the ages of 10 and 16, and carry them off to Moscow. And those children never come home




123 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on the Need for Extending Inflation Controls.
June 14, 1951

We would need controls even if the fighting in Korea stopped tomorrow. The threat of Communist aggression is worldwide, and must be met with worldwide defenses. We are carrying on a tremendous mobilization program which is absolutely necessary to prevent Soviet rulers from starting a third world war

This is a time of national danger. The welfare of all of us is at stake. If inflation gets away from us, and wrecks our savings and ruins our economy, it would be the easiest victory the Kremlin could ask for. Communist Russia would win the whole world to totalitarianism without firing a shot. 
That is what the Communists have been hoping for. They have been hoping for years for the collapse of the American economy. 
For years we have been proving the Communists to be wrong. We have prevented depressions. We have proved over and over again--to the Kremlin's confusion and dismay-that instead of collapsing, our economy is growing stronger and stronger.
We must keep right on proving that



138 - Address in Tullahoma, Tenn., at the Dedication of the Arnold Engineering Development Center.
June 25, 1951

But the rulers of the Soviet Union had a different idea. They did not want to cooperate in keeping the peace. The people of Russia--the common everyday people of Russia--want peace just as much as anyone rise, but their rulers in the Kremlin saw that the nations of the world had been weakened and demoralized by the agonies of the war. They saw a chance to move in and impose their own system of slavery on other nations. 
We tried to settle postwar problems with the Soviet Union on a decent and honorable basis. But they broke one agreement after another. We offered to place the means of atomic warfare under effective international control. That was an offer to save mankind forever from the horror of an atomic war. But the Soviet Union refused to accept it--refused to accept the most unselfish offer for peace any nation in the history of the world ever made. We had a monopoly on that weapon, and we offered to surrender it to the world, for peace. The Russians wouldn't accept that. 
Our actions showed that we were for peace. Even though our efforts were rejected by the Soviet rulers, our actions won for us the confidence and trust of other free nations. In spite of all the false and lying propaganda of the Kremlin, it was clear to all the world that we wanted peace. 
At the same time, we made it clear to all the world that we would not engage in appeasement. When the Soviet Union began its campaign of undermining and destroying other free nations, we did not sit idly by. 
We came to the aid of the peoples of France and Italy in their struggle against the political onslaught of communism. In each of these countries, communism has been defeated in two free elections since 1947. There is no longer any danger that they will vote themselves into the hands of the Soviet Union. 
We came to the aid of the brave people of Berlin when the Kremlin tried to take them over. We and our allies kept Berlin alive by the airlift and it is still free today
That political smear campaign is doing this country no good. It's playing right into the hands of the Russians. I have said that right along: it's playing right into the hands of the Russians

A year ago today, Korea looked like an easy conquest to the Soviet rulers in Moscow and their agents in the Far East. But they were wrong. Today, after more than a million Communist casualties--after the destruction of one Communist army after another--the forces of aggression have been thrown back on their heels. They are back behind the line where they started

Of course, we cannot promise that there will not be a world war. The Kremlin has it in its power to bring about such a war if it desires. It has a powerful military machine, and its rulers are absolute tyrants. 
We cannot be sure what the Soviet rulers will do. 
But we can put ourselves in a position to say to them: attack--and you will have the united resources of the free nations thrown against you; attack--and you will be confronted by a war you cannot possibly win
The Kremlin is still trying to divide the free nations. The thing that the Kremlin fears most is the unity of the free world. 
The rulers of the Soviet Union have been trying to split up the nations of the North Atlantic Treaty. They have been trying to sow distrust between us and the other free countries. Their great objective is to strip us of our allies and to force us to "go it alone." 
If they could do that, they could go ahead with their plan of taking over the world, nation by nation.
Unfortunately, it isn't only the Kremlin that has been trying to separate us from our allies. There are some people in this country, too, who have been trying to get us to "go it alone." There are people here who have been sowing distrust of our allies and magnifying our differences with them. Some of these people are sincere but misguided. Others are deliberately putting petty politics ahead of their country's safety


And look at the alternatives these critics have to present. Here is what they say. Take a chance on spreading the conflict in Korea. Take a chance on tying up all our resources in a vast war in Asia. Take a chance on losing our allies in Europe. Take a chance the Soviet Union won't fight in the Far East. Take a chance we won't have a third world war



140 - The President's News Conference
June 28, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I think you will find that the statement made by the State Department this morning covers that question. They submitted it and I approved it



144 - Address at the Ceremonies Commemorating the 175th Anniversary of the Declaration of Independence.
July 4, 1951

But the United Nations faces stern, determined opposition. This is an old story. The Declaration of Independence was also met by determined opposition. A spokesman for the British King called the Declaration "absurd," "visionary," and "subversive." The ideas of freedom and equality and self-government were first fiercely opposed in every country by the vested interests and the reactionaries. Today, the idea of an international organization to keep the peace is being attacked and undermined and fought by reactionary forces everywhere--and particularly by the forces of Soviet communism

It is much the same with Korea. We are not fighting there to conquer China, or to destroy the Soviet Empire. We are fighting for a simple aim--as important to us today as the goal of independence was in 1776-the aim of securing theright of nations to be free and to live in peace

We cannot ignore the danger of military outbreaks in other parts of the world. The greatest threat to world peace, the tremendous armed power of the Soviet Union, will still remain, even if the Korean fighting stops. The threat of Soviet aggression still hangs heavy over many a country--including our own. We must continue, therefore, to build up our military forces at a rapid rate. And we must continue to help build up the defenses of other free nations. 
And we must continue the struggle to overcome the constant efforts of the Soviet rulers to dominate the world by lies and threats and subversion. 
The Soviet rulers are trying to destroy the very idea of freedom, in every part of the world. They are trying to take from us the confidence and friendship of other nations. They hate us not because we are Americans, but because we are free--because we are the greatest example of the power of freedom. 
The Soviet rulers are engaged in a relentless effort, therefore, to persuade other nations that we do not, in fact, stand for freedom. They are trying to convince the people of Europe that we intend to exploit them. They are telling the people of Asia-who are for the most part ill informed about our purposes--that we mean to fasten new chains upon them. They are trying to make the rest of the world believe that we want to control them for our own profit--that the ideas of our Declaration of Independence are a sham and a fraud. 
This shrewd, this unscrupulous, this evil propaganda attack--we cannot overcome with military weapons. You cannot transfix a tie with a bayonet, or blast deceit with machine-gun fire. The only weapons against such enemies are truth and fair dealing
All these tasks challenge the ability of free people to govern themselves with both reason and resolution. There are people who say our democratic form of government cannot do these things. They say we cannot stick to a hard, tough policy of self-denial and self-control long enough to win the struggle. They say we are no match for the steady, ruthless way the Soviet rulers seek their goals




165 - The President's News Conference
July 19, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. No. 
THE PRESIDENT. I haven't seen it



174 - Address in Detroit at the Celebration of the City's 250th Anniversary.
July 28, 1951

But whatever happens in Korea, we must not make the mistake of jumping to the conclusion that the Soviet rulers have given up their ideas of world conquest. They may talk about peace, but it is action that counts. 
What they have been doing is quite clear. They are putting themselves in a position where they can commit new acts of aggression at any time. Why right now, for example, the armed forces of the Soviet satellites are rapidly being brought to a peak of military readiness. 
In the last several months the satellite countries in Eastern Europe have been forced by the Kremlin to reorganize their armies. The size of these armies has been increased, and modern Russian equipment is being furnished to them in large quantities. 
We know that Bulgaria, Rumania, and Hungary now have armed forces far greater than those allowed under the peace treaties they signed in 1947. That is one of our difficulties in dealing with Soviets of any kind, they have no respect for signed treaties or their given word. 
In the Far East the situation is much the same. The North Koreans and the Chinese Communists--so-called volunteers--are getting a steady flow of new equipment from the Soviet Union for ground and air use. 
The Russians themselves have more than 4 million men under arms in Europe and the Far East. There are heavy concentrations of Soviet air, land, and sea forces in the Russian provinces along the Manchurian border, across from Japan, and across from Alaska. 
As your President, I am telling you that the dangers in other parts of the world are just as great as they are in Korea. Every day reports come to my desk about Soviet military preparations around the world. If every one of you could see these reports and receive this same information, you would give up any thought that danger is over. You would be just as anxious as I am to see that this country builds up its armed forces, equips them with the most modern weapons, and helps to arm our allies
The aim of this administration is world peace. My term in office is dedicated to bringing us closer to that goal. Our great chance lies in building up such strength and unity among the free nations that the Kremlin will have to drop its plans of aggression and subversion. When we reach that point, there can be peace between the Soviet Union and the rest of the world, They can have peace any time they want it. 
I know of only two alternatives to this policy, and the American people have rejected both of them. One is to start a world war now, with all its horrible and unforeseeable consequences. Some people would like to do that. The other is to withdraw and isolate ourselves. That means surrendering the rest of the world to Soviet communism. Neither of these alternatives could possibly lead to peace.



188 - The President's News Conference
August 9, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. [Reading] "The Government of the Soviet Union"--we have copies of this for you outside, too--"has replied to the resolution of the United States Congress declaring the friendship of our people for the Soviet peoples and our deep desire to achieve world peace. The Soviet Government withheld this resolution from the people of the Soviet Union for more than a month--although of course some of them heard it over the Voice of America. Now the Soviet Government has finally released the resolution through the Soviet newspapers and over the Soviet radio. 
"I am glad they did this, as millions of Soviet citizens can now hear and read for themselves the resolution of friendship enacted by the representatives of the American people. 
"Mr. Shvernik's reply, naturally, was released in our country as soon as it was received, since in a free country there is no reason or desire to withhold such information from the people. I noted with special interest the statement in Mr. Shvernik's letter that the Soviet Government places no barriers in the path of the intercourse of the Soviet people with the people of other countries. 
"This has not been true in the past--witness the rigid prohibitions laid down by the Soviet Government against people from the Soviet Union traveling abroad and people from other countries traveling in the Soviet Union, the rigid restrictions imposed by the Soviet Government on the reading of books and magazines and newspapers from outside of the Soviet Union by the Soviet people, the large-scale and costly effort by the Soviet Government to 'jam' the radio broadcasts of the Voice of America and other free radios, the prevention by the Soviet Government of Russian wives of citizens of other countries from leaving the Soviet Union, and many other barriers preventing travel and communication between the Soviet Union and other countries. 
"I will be particularly interested to see whether the Soviet Government means what it says, and now intends to change these policies.




191 - Address at the Dedication of the New Washington Headquarters of the American Legion.
August 14, 1951

Now, this is an old Communist trick in reverse. Everybody in Russia lives in terror of being called an anti-Communist. For once that charge is made against anybody in Russia--no matter what the facts are--he is on the way out. And what I mean is, he is on the way out



193 - The President's News Conference
August 16, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. If he wants to see me, I will be most happy to talk with him. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I don't think the treaty arrangements can be upset by anybody




200 - The President's News Conference
August 23, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. That's the way I feel about it.



209 - The President's News Conference
August 30, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. That is nothing new for them. It isn't true, of course. Like all the rest of their propaganda, not founded on fact at all

THE PRESIDENT. No, there is no hurry. Those things have to be done very deliberately. I meant what I said when I said I would pursue the correspondence



225 - Address at the Constitution Day Ceremonies at the Library of Congress.
September 17, 1951

In our own lifetime we have learned anew the human misery that an absolute, powered government can create. We have seen it in the brief history of the Fascist and Nazi tyrannies. We are witnessing it today in the tyranny of Soviet communism. 
A constitution is not just a matter of words. There are other constitutions which may read as well as ours. Just take, for example, the constitution of the Soviet Union. That constitution has a lot of fine language in it--a lot of beautiful and meaningful words. That constitution of the Soviet Union says that Soviet citizens are guaranteed freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and freedom of assembly. I wonder what would happen to a citizen of the Soviet Union if he tried to exercise any of those freedoms? It professes to guarantee that citizens of the Soviet Union shall be secure in their persons and in their homes. And in addition, it purports to guarantee equality, theright to work, theright to an education, theright to rest and leisure, freedom of religion, and a lot of other fine things. 
But these good words in the Soviet constitution mean less than nothing. They are empty promises, because the citizens of the Soviet Union have no way of enforcing their fights against the state. 
In the Soviet Union the power of the state is above all fights. The government does not have to obey the law. As a result the citizens of the Soviet Union enjoy none of the freedoms which are guaranteed in their constitution. They do not have freedom of speech or freedom of the press. They may be arrested without cause; their homes may be invaded without a search warrant; they may be executed or exiled without a fair trial and without appeal. 
Their constitutional guarantees are just as false as their treaty agreements. A Bolshevik agreement is not worth the paper it's written on. It is only a scrap of paper. 
The Soviet citizen lives in fear. His society is a jungle through which the naked power of the government prowls like a beast of prey, making all men afraid. 
The Communists claim that they have to use the weapons of tyranny in order to improve the conditions of the people. That just isn't true. That is a rejection of the long experience of mankind. By resorting to the worst evils of ancient tyranny, the Soviet rulers have held their citizens in terror and bondage, while freedom is growing in the rest of the world
A constitution must do more than provide restraints against the illegal use of power. It must give the people a means of dealing with their day-to-day problems of continually correcting the injustices that spring up in human society. A constitution that is not adaptable--that prevents the government from acting for the general welfare of the people--will not survive. It will become a mere historical curiosity, as has the Soviet constitution




227 - The President's News Conference
September 20, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. When you are in the position to enforce those agreements, they will be kept. That is the reason for the defense program. 
THE PRESIDENT. That's a question I can't answer. We will have to wait for results to find out whether that is true or not. 
THE PRESIDENT. There is a possibility, a stronger possibility than ever, I think, if we stick to our knitting and go ahead with the defense program. 
THE PRESIDENT. Under the circumstances it is necessary. And I dislike it very much. That is what we organized the United Nations for--was to argue these things out without the use of force--but it has become impossible. Korea is the example. 
THE PRESIDENT. I can name you several examples if you want them: Greece, Turkey, Korea, and Berlin. Trieste in the beginning. 
THE PRESIDENT. To our ability to meet force with force. That is all we are aiming at. We don't want to misuse that force. Our idea is a free and happy world. That is what we are going to continue to fight for. 
THE PRESIDENT. I didn't say that. That is what brought on the Korean thing



235 - Address at the Dedication of Equestrian Statues, a Gift of the People of Italy.
September 26, 1951

We also intend to keep on working for the admission of Italy into the United Nations. If the Soviet Union keeps on vetoing Italy's membership, other ways must be found to enable Italy to play a full and equal part in upholding the principles of the United Nations

Only by such changes can we preserve the fundamental values of the past. Only by such combined efforts can we counter the menace of Soviet aggression. Only through such cooperation by all can we raise the living standards and increase the opportunities of any single nation



241 - Address to the Washington Pilgrimage of American Churchmen.
September 28, 1951

This is the great problem we must meet. We cannot yield to Soviet communism, without betraying the ideals we live for. We cannot have another world war without jeopardizing our civilization



247 - The President's News Conference
October 4, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. Well, they were air pictures of the great cities. And it's terrible. I wish I had them of Russia and their manufacturing plants. I could use them

THE PRESIDENT. They exploded it. Of course they knew it!

THE PRESIDENT. I agree, but then I don't think that it should have been made available to the Russians. 
THE PRESIDENT. I am making no inferences at all. I made the announcement yesterday, the only one that I can make
THE PRESIDENT. I am not sure. I hope it hasn't




251 - The President's News Conference
October 11, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I knew nothing about it. I knew nothing about it whatever. All I know is what I see in the papers



256 - Address in Winston-Salem at Groundbreaking Ceremonies, Wake Forest College.
October 15, 1951

I think not. Our policy is based on the hope that it will be possible to live, without a war, in the same world as the Soviet Union-if the free nations have adequate defenses. As our defenses improve, the chances of negotiating successfully with the Soviet Union will increase. The growth of our defenses will help to convince the leaders of the Soviet Union that peaceful arrangements are in their own self-interest. And as our strength increases, we should be able to negotiate settlements that the Soviet Union will respect and live up to. And the only way they will respect and live up to their agreements is because they know that somebody is able to carry it out. 
For example, the Kremlin may then be willing to discuss the possibility of genuine, enforceable arrangements to reduce and control armaments. Since the end of World War II, we have been trying to work out a plan for the balanced reduction and control of armaments. 
Long before the Soviet Union got the atomic bomb, we developed a .plan to control atomic weapons. Other nations endorsed this plan. It was a good plan. It would work. It would free the world from the scourge of atomic warfare. But the Soviet Union rejected it. We had over 260 meetings with the Soviet negotiators, trying to reach an agreement, and they wouldn't agree. And we had a monopoly on atomic weapons. We were willing to forgo that monopoly, the first time in the history of the world that a powerful nation has been willing to do anything of that sort. 
Working with other nations, we also developed initial plans looking toward the balanced reduction and control of other types of weapons. The Soviet Union rejected these plans, too. 
Last year, before the United Nations, I proposed further work on the problem of disarmament, and a new approach. I proposed a merger of the two United Nations commissions working in this field, the one on atomic energy, and the one on other types of weapons. Work on this proposal has gone forward and good progress has been made. We are ready now, as we have always been, to sit down with the Soviet Union, and all the nations concerned, in the United Nations, and work together for lifting the burden of armaments and securing the peace. 
I hope that the growing strength of the free world will convince the leaders of the Soviet Union that it is to their best interest to lay aside their aggressive plans, and their phoney peace propaganda, and join with us and the other free nations to work out practical arrangements for achieving peace.




261 - The President's News Conference
October 18, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I haven't seen the statement, and therefore I can't comment on it. 
THE PRESIDENT. I stand by that



271 - Address at the Cornerstone Laying of the District of Columbia Red Cross Building.
October 24, 1951

I hope the time will not be far distant when the leaders of the Soviet Union and their satellites will come to see that it is utterly foolish to oppose the united will of all the other peoples of the world for peace and justice. But so long as the forces of aggression are attacking the United Nations, there must be no weakening--there must be no slackening of our effort to check aggression and to build up the defenses of the free world




275 - The President's News Conference
October 25, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I have no comment on that



293 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on International Arms Reduction.
November 7, 1951

We are doing this because we must. The Soviet Union and its satellites have very large military forces ready for action. The Soviet Union has a growing stock of atomic bombs. The aggression in Korea has shown that Communist imperialism will resort to open warfare to gain its ends

Three weeks ago, in a speech in North Carolina, I said that we are willing, as we have always been, to sit down in the United Nations with the Soviet Union, and all the other countries concerned, and work together for lessening the burden of armaments. The proposal we have announced today, along with France and Great Britain, offers a practical way to do just that

Any nation which is not willing to agree to this step, and to carry it out, is not really interested in disarmament. The Soviet Government has at various times talked about reducing armaments, but they never have proposed an effective system for finding out the facts. No responsible government can agree to cut its own defenses unless it knows where such a cut will leave it in relation to the armed forces of other countries. That is why we propose the first step of an honest, continuing inventory of all armed forces and armaments, including atomic weapons

If the Soviet Union and its satellites are really afraid of the intentions of any of the free countries, as they say they are, here is a plan they can adopt with safety. It would give them the same protection, every step of the way, that it gives every other country. And on the other hand, we can afford to go into such a plan as this because we would have safeguards against bad faith. 
In the face of the long and gloomy history of our negotiations with the Soviet Union, there are, no doubt, many people who think that any further attempts to control and reduce armaments are a waste of time. It is true that we have experienced much bad faith, deceit, and broken promises on the part of the Soviet Union over the last 6 years. It is true that we have met rebuffs and refusals from the Soviet Government, ever since the day we offered to give up our monopoly of atomic weapons and to prohibit them under a system of international control
I urge the Kremlin to accept this proposal. I urge them to make it known to the people of the Soviet Union. The men in the Kremlin are responsible for the lives and the future of a great nation--of a great and creative people--a people who long for peace, even as all people long for peace. The men in the Kremlin must know how the people behind the Iron Curtain are crushed down by the burden of armaments and production for war--how they hope for release and for enjoyment of the better things of life




295 - The President's News Conference at Key West
November 15, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. We of course have no official communication from the Russian Government itself on its attitude toward the proposal that was made by the three powers. We hope that that reaction will be favorable. I think the Russian people want peace just as all the rest of the world wants peace. 
THE PRESIDENT. I hope it will be favorable. 
THE PRESIDENT. The response of the Russian Government to the proposal. 
THE PRESIDENT. Nothing official at all





































































