MID 219301, US v North Korea, 9 Jan to 8-Feb-79 to 27-Mar-80




Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
January 26, 1979

One obvious item on the agenda would be to see maximum Chinese influence be exerted on North Korea, and in response, we'll exert maximum influence on South Korea to bring those two groups of leaders together to alleviate tension there



Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
February 9, 1979

The rate of returning them to the United States is constantly being assessed. We've already brought back a few. Right now we are holding in abeyance any further reduction in American troop levels until we can assess the new intelligence data on the buildup of North Korean force levels, the impact of the normalization with China, and the new peace proposal or discussions for peace that have been put forward by both the North Korean and the South Korean Governments


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Members of the Japanese Press. 
June 20, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. We have been concerned about the new estimates of North Korean military strength, which are higher than we had previously supposed. I will be discussing this matter with President Park and also with our own military commanders in South Korea. Whatever decision I make about the level of American forces, I will keep the commitment that I originally made, that is, not to do anything to disturb the military balance or to create instability on the Korean peninsula. 
My own hope is there might be fruitful meetings directly between the leaders of South Korea and North Korea in the near future, either with or without an American presence during those meetings. I think this is the ultimate solution to the present divisions of the people of Korea. But in any case, we will do our part to maintain stability there, the security of our allies, and to let the world know we resolutely will maintain our responsibilities.



Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Yoshio Hori and Yoshiki Hidaka of the Japan Broadcasting, Corporation (NHK). 
June 20, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. Well, we arecommitted, as we have been for the last quarter century, to peace and stability in the Korean peninsula, and we have no intention of abandoning this responsibility. What we would ultimately like to see are the leaders of North and South Korea negotiating directly with one another, either with or without our own presence, to reach an accommodation with one another. But until that happy event can come to be, we will continue to maintain an American presence there to keep the balance of power intact within the Korean peninsula to ensure peace


Korean and East Asian Issues Questions and Answers for Publication in the Orient Press
June 21, 1979

Not spoken aloud



Seoul, Republic of Korea Toasts at the State Dinner
June 30, 1979

Compare your progress with that of the economy in the North. The Republic of Korea is proof that a free economy is the clearest road to shared prosperity and a better life for all

We must take advantage of changes in the international environment to lower tensions between South and North and, ultimately, to bring permanent peace and reunification to the Korean peninsula


The President's Trip to Japan and the Republic of Korea Remarks During a Background Briefing Given by Administration Officials for Reporters on Board Air Force One. 
July 1, 1979

I think that the alleviation of tension between South Korea and North Korea, if we can accomplish this, will be of great benefit. I would like to see trade open up between South Korea and the People's Republic of China; between ourselves and North Korea on the same time basis. 
I think that our genuine concern about human rights has been imparted very dearly to President Park and all the members of the Government of the Republic of Korea. My belief is that the military' relationship has been much more actively clarified. accommodate the recent We will development of the buildup in North Korea adequately. We will not abandon ourcommitments to the Republic of Korea


Remarks to Representatives of U.S. Teams to the 1980 Summer Olympics
March 21, 1980

Since the Second World War the Soviets have invaded successfully and have subjugated and taken away the freedom of people in Poland, in Hungary, in Czechoslovakia, in other countries as well, as you know. But for more than 25 years they did not use their massive forces, after the Warsaw Pact was formed, to go into an adjacent country themselves. They used others to fight the battles for them, the Vietnamese and the Cubans, the North Koreans earlier. This was a radical departure from past Soviet policy, to go in themselves, and it cannot go unmet



