MID 20001, US v. USSR, 	7 sep to 7-Oct-56 to 6-Nov-56




204 - Remarks at the People-to-People Conference.
September 11, 1956

In short, what we must do is to widen every possible chink in the Iron Curtain and bring the family of Russia, or of any other country behind that Iron Curtain, that is laboring to better the lot of their children--as humans do the world over closer into our circle, to show how we do it, and then to sit down between us to say, "Now, how do we improve the lot of both of us?" 


210 - Radio and Television Address Opening the President's Campaign for Re-Election
September 19, 1956

Iran.--This country had been tormented for years by Soviet threats and Communist subversion. The resources of that nation threatened, for a time, to be lost behind the Iron Curtain. We met that threat. Iran stays free

We have done it with what has been called the "open skies" declaration, proposing mutual air inspection of American and Soviet defenses. 
We have done it with what I might call an "open minds" spirit in our diplomacy--for in meetings like those in Geneva last year we have made known our passion for peace in ways understood by men everywhere
Finally: We witness today, in the economic arena, the rise of the first great industrial power to challenge the West. This power is the Soviet Union--with its steel production, its heavy machinery, its natural resources, its technical skills

This power, as it is pitted against the West, will demand of us many things. It will demand the most vigorous economy of our history. It will demand the technical training of our youth as a direct concern of national security. And it will demand, among the governments of the free nations, the closest possible coordination of economic action. 
Such--in the simplest of forms--are some of the great problems we face. 
There are--let me state plainly and immediately--some ways not to meet these problems, as they must be met: with wisdom and strength. 
We cannot prove wise and strong with public speech that erroneously asserts our economic weakness. For the people of the world and the leaders of the Soviet Union must never be deceived--or delighted--by any myth of American weakness. They must know the truth of our strength.



229 - The President's News Conference
October 5, 1956

The Soviets and the Iron Curtain countries do not announce it. So we don't know anything about their test until after it has accomplished, and we could detect it from debris and sound, and So on




251 - Address at a Rally in the Civic Auditorium, Seattle, Washington.
October 17, 1956

10) Now we have proven that our quest for peace with justice does not require repetitions of the Korean tragedy to deter further Soviet military aggression. In this quest--our continuing, persistent and most difficult quest--we have achieved one thing perhaps more important than the solution of many local crises. And it is this: we have made known, in ways understood by men everywhere in the world, America's uncompromising devotion to the cause of peace. We have done this at a series of world conferences--rising to the climax of the Summit at Geneva. And we have done this with our repeated and specific proposals for world disarmament--our "open skies" offer of mutual inspection of Soviet and American defenses--and with our program of atoms for peace



257 - Remarks on the Aviation Industry, at the Airport, Burbank, California.
October 19, 1956

So you, as I see it, are one of the great and essential elements in the country's scheme and plan of national defense. And in this day and time, when we have always with us a recalcitrant Soviet government that will not agree to reasonable propositions for disarmament for bringing a greater confidence to the world, every day in your work, in its quality, in its continuity, you remain one of the greatest factors in our national defense



272 - Address in Madison Square Garden, New York City.
October 25, 1956

There is, of course, nothing amusing when the opposition's political techniques are extended to world affairs. 
They urge a vigorous and realistic policy towards the Communist empire--and they suggest that we begin, in our relations with the Soviet Union, by trusting our national safety to agreements that have no effective safeguards and no controls





282 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on the Developments in Eastern Europe and the Middle East.
October 31, 1956

After World War II, the Soviet Union used military force to impose on the nations of Eastern Europe, governments of Soviet choice--servants of Moscow. 
It has been consistent United States policy--without regard to political party--to seek to end this situation. We have sought to fulfill the wartime pledge of the United Nations that these countries, over-run by wartime armies, would once again know sovereignty and self-government. 
We could not, of course, carry out this policy by resort to force. Such force would have been contrary both to the best interests of the Eastern European peoples and to the abiding principles of the United Nations. But we did help to keep alive the hope of these peoples for freedom
Only yesterday the Soviet Union issued an important statement on its relations with all the countries of Eastern Europe. This statement recognized the need for review of Soviet policies, and the amendment of these policies to meet the demands of the people for greater national independence and personal freedom. The Soviet Union declared its readiness to consider the withdrawal of Soviet "advisers"--who have been, as you know, the effective ruling force in Soviet occupied countries--and also to consider withdrawal of Soviet forces from Poland, Hungary and Rumania. 
We cannot yet know if these avowed purposes will be truly carried out. 
And second, if the Soviet Union indeed faithfully acts upon its announced intention, the world will witness the greatest forward stride toward justice, trust and understanding among nations in our generation
We have also--with respect to the Soviet Union--sought clearly to remove any false fears that we would look upon new governments in these Eastern European countries as potential military allies. We have no such ulterior purpose. We see these peoples as friends, and we wish simply that they be friends who are free




283 - Address in Convention Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
November 1, 1956

In all of this the true intent of the Soviet Union seems not yet clear. We are only today--troubled by news of new Soviet efforts to suppress the people of Hungary by force. If this be true, this is a black day of sorrow. But the Soviet Union has declared its readiness to reshape oppressive policies of a decade-and to contemplate withdrawal of its armed forces from Poland and Hungary and Rumania. If this be true--and if this be done--there could be in the making a bright new day of justice and of trust among all nations. 
It is timely to ask: How have we practiced our principles at this historic moment? 
We have always made clear that we would never renounce our hope and concern for these lands and peoples. 
We have denounced--before the world forum of the United Nations--the Soviet use of force in its attempt to suppress these peoples' risings. And we ourselves have abstained from use of force--knowing it to be contrary to both the interests of these peoples, and to the spirit and methods of the United Nations. 
And we have welcomed these events seeking for no selfish advantage. We seek from these peoples neither material gain nor military alliance. We seek simply their freedom--for their sake, and for freedom's sake. 
We have, in these same days, been submitted to a less hopeful--a much sterner--test of our principles. A test--I believe it is--by which the world will judge us, for long to come. 
The United Nations--within 48 hours of its being called to consider the matter of foreign--Soviet--forces in Hungary-was called to judge the use of foreign forces in Egypt. 
I, as your President, am proud--and I trust that you are proud--that the United States declared itself against the use of force in, not one, but both these cases










