MID 180601, US v Cambodia, 19 nov to 19-Dec-67	to 28-Apr-69

1 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
January 1, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. I can say that we have read with a great deal of interest--and I might say pleasure--the quoted statements by Prince Sihanouk. We are studying those statements very carefully, and confirming them. 
When we have anything to announce on it, I will be in touch with you. I would say that we are quite encouraged by the reactions of Prince Sihanouk as reflected by the newspaper story. Any further announcement will be made after we have gone into it more thoroughly 9 and more definite statements can be made


467 - The President's News Conference
September 6, 1968

He has been my special adviser in that field for some time. He is leaving today for visits to the Philippines, Japan, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, and South Vietnam. I have asked him to pursue especially plans for the Mekong Basin program for development for peaceful purposes. If you are interested further in his itinerary, the Press Office will give it to you


472 - Remarks in New Orleans Before the 50th Annual National Convention of the American Legion.
September 10, 1968

As the result of that effort, our negotiating team would be willing to meet with the representatives of North Vietnam. The enemy suggested that we meet in Cambodia, and then he suggested that we meet in Poland. Against great odds and against the advice of some of our more eager people, we finally agreed not to meet in either of those places, but to meet in Paris. The wisdom of that decision, I think, is pretty clear to almost any of you today


557 - The President's News Conference
October 24, 1968

The decision we made March 31st resulted in their agreement first to meet in Cambodia and later in Poland, and finally we agreed on Paris. I am very glad that I made that decision March 31st


644 - The President's Remarks to Educational Leaders Upon Being Honored for His Contributions in the Field of Education.
December 27, 1968

And now I am going to run, because I am told I have less than two minutes until the splashdown. But when we think about our boys in Cambodian prisons coming home, the Pueblo crew being released, and the Apollo men just short of the culmination of our dreams, the economy where we are, and all that has happened to us this Christmas, we Americans ought to quit this business of just going around talking about everything being wrong, because so many wonderful things have come to us that we ought to count our blessings and be thankful for them and for each other--and I am for you teachers


646 - The President's News Conference
December 27, 1968

So with unemployment down, with revenues up, with a balanced budget, with our boys home from Cambodia, our men home from the Pueblo,10 the Apollo coming in as it has, as I told you this morning, Mr. Vance11 says he believes we can get going in substantive talks after his return there, and we are just praying that can be true. The one thing that mars all of our hopes and wishes this Christmas is that our men are away out there protecting us


683 - Remarks at the Signing Ceremony for the Economic Report.
January 16, 1969

We have had three crises in these negotiations since the stage was set and they were opened 9 months ago: first, on the place for the talks, you will remember the demands made for Cambodia and Warsaw, Poland; on the terms for a bombing cessation; and on the procedures for the new talks


