MID 203201, US v China, 12 mar to 11-Apr-55 to 11-May-55
This is the only statement where he uses ChiCom/Chi-Com.



59 - The President's News Conference
March 23, 1955

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think at the present moment it is completely academic, because every suggestion that has been made of peace in the Far East to the Red Communists has been accepted only, from their viewpoint, as insults to them.
I think it is completely academic; there is no use speculating on it

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Harsch, I must confess I cannot answer that question in advance. 
The only thing I know about war are two things: the most changeable factor in war is human nature in its day-by-day manifestation; but the only unchanging factor in war is human nature. 
And the next thing is that every war is going to astonish you in the way it occurred, and in the way it is carried out. 
So that for a man to predict, particularly if he has the responsibility for making the decision, to predict what he is going to use, how he is going to do it, would I think exhibit his ignorance of war; that is what I believe. 
So I think you just have to wait, and that is the kind of prayerful decision that may some day face a President.
We are trying to establish conditions where he doesn't



62 - The President's News Conference
March 30, 1955

THE PRESIDENT. Only the report, Mr. Burd, that they are still working actively in this field. That is the report. 




81 - The President's News Conference
April 27, 1955

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think the change is far more apparent than real. 
Last Saturday it was stated we were not going to talk about the affairs of Nationalist China except with them present. I believe that Mr. Dulles made this point clear also at his own press conference, saying we would not discuss the affairs of the Chinese Nationalists behind their back; but that as a test of good intent, if the Chi-Com wanted to talk merely about cease-fire, we would be glad to meet with them and talk with them, but there would be no conferring about the affairs of the Chinese Nationalists. 
So I think that the one statement may have erred in not being as complete as it should have been, but I don't believe it was a reversal of attitude. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, you are correct in making the observation. Anything that doesn't affect the Chinese Nationalists, and there seems to be an opportunity for us to further the easing of tensions, the advancement of world peace, and certainly getting back our prisoners, of course we would talk about it. 
I merely meant to say that when it comes to talking about the affairs that involve our ally bound to us by treaty we are not going to talk behind their backs. That was the one caveat I put on the answer. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mrs. Craig, I didn't say that it was of no interest to them. I did say they are not fighting at this moment. Therefore, a cease-fire is purely on the Chi-Com's part. 
Therefore we can talk to the Chi-Coms about their own firing without damaging the interests of the Chinese Nationalists; that is all
THE PRESIDENT. That might be a touch of an overstatement because I have agreed with what Mr. Dulles said. I agreed with it before he said it.
I believe it is perfectly legitimate for us to talk to the ChiComs about stopping firing. 
Now, if we overstated the case Saturday, well, that was to that extent an error in terminology




88 - Remarks at the Governors' Conference Dinner.
May 2, 1955

And I should say that the only requisite other than that we be honest is that we try to be informed, and that is not always easy. We know the world is complex. We know that our own daily, local lives become more complex in everything from distributing of a vaccine to the handling of problems dealing with Iran or Formosa or China, or anything else





