MID 222401, US v USSR, 10 Jun to 10-Jul-79 to 10-Aug-79



The President's Trip to Vienna, Austria Remarks on Departure From the White House. 
June 14, 1979

The summit in Vienna will be the 10th such summit between American Presidents and the leaders of the Soviet Union since World War II. We do have significant differences between the Soviet Union. They are important, and they require the most careful discussion. 
We will make clear to the Soviet Union our views and our purposes throughout the world, so that no misunderstanding on their part might provide a dangerous prospect for the people of our two nations and the rest of the world. 
We will try to broaden our communications with the Soviets and to create new channels of understanding between our two countries for these purposes. 
We will seek new areas where more cooperation might be forthcoming and also less competition. The arms limitation treaty which President Brezhnev and I will sign next Monday embodies that spirit, and it gives us enhanced national security and an increased hope for a peaceful future. 
And with SALT II, we continue the 30-year search for ways to avoid nuclear war. That was the goal of the Limited Test Ban Treaty; that was the goal of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty; that was the goal of SALT I. It has been the goal with SALT II of three Presidents negotiating over the last 7 years on behalf of the American people to make this agreement which we will sign next week fair, equitable, a stabilizing force, and verifiable. That will be our goal as we begin to discuss further limitations on SALT III. 
No one treaty can take us back to the time that we enjoyed before nuclear weapons became a potential destructive force, just as no one summit conference can end the sharp competition between ourselves and the Soviet Union. But we and the Soviet Union can agree that the security of both nations and the stability of the world depends upon the avoiding of a nuclear conflict which some few may survive, but which certainly no one could win.



Vienna Summit Meeting Remarks of President Rudolph Kirchschlager of Austria and President Carter at the Welcoming Ceremony. 
June 14, 1979

I've come to meet with President Brezhnev on a mission of peace—to strengthen and to enlarge cooperation and understanding between the United States of America and the Soviet Union, to reduce the dangers of nuclear war, and to move towards a more stable and a more secure world. 
This summit involves the United States and the Soviet Union directly. But all people have an urgent stake in these talks. No human being can rest secure in a world of unrestrained nuclear weapons. All nations and all people share an overriding interest in maintaining peace in the nuclear age. 
This city is especially appropriate as a setting to pursue the goals of understanding. Historically, Vienna has been a crossroads where different cultures and political systems meet. The United States and the Soviet Union, for instance, concluded the first major cooperative agreement of the postwar period 24 years ago in this city in 1955, helping to move both nations beyond the hostilities and suspicions of the cold war era towards stability in Europe and greater cooperation in the pursuit of peace. 
For nearly three decades, the United States and the Soviet Union have sought to limit and to control the momentum of the nuclear arms race. This week we continue in that process with the signing of SALT II. We have no illusion that this agreement will rid the world once and for all of danger, nor will it end all the differences that exist between our two countries. But we are confident that SALT II will widen the areas of cooperation and reduce substantially the dangers of nuclear holocaust



Vienna Summit Meeting Toast at a Working Dinner Hosted by the United States Delegation. 
June 16, 1979

Very briefly, Mr. President, let me say that we believe in restraining conflicts that could undermine the goals that we have established for ourselves. We are working for cooperation among nations, for the peaceful settlement of disputes, for economic development with social justice and for human rights around the world. These are the ideas we would like to explore with you as we discuss the unique responsibilities of the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union. 
And, finally, Mr. President, I believe that our successful effort to limit nuclear weapons can be a framework for guidance toward new areas of cooperation and for facing peacefully those areas in which we still compete. 
Mr. President, we raise our glasses to toast our success for SALT II. Let us pledge to seek new areas of common understanding in the same spirit of common sense. Let us pledge our continuing cooperation and honesty in our discussions, enhanced security of both nations, and, above all, a peaceful world. 
Mr. President, I would like to propose a toast to you, Mr. President, and to the heroic people of the Soviet Union, our present and future friends



Vienna Summit Meeting Toast at a Working Dinner Hosted by the Soviet Delegation. 
June 17, 1979

Today, Mr. President, we discussed a range of issues important not only to each of us but to the entire world. On some of the issues, particularly in the arms control field, we were able to further our joint efforts to develop rules curbing the military competition between us and to lay the groundwork for further progress on the control and the regulation of nuclear weapons. 
On some other issues, particularly international problems in troubled areas of the world, we did not always agree. And we were not able to develop a common approach. We did agree, however, to continue searching for a peaceful solution of these differences. 
Both our countries face risks that stem from the changes sweeping many parts of the world today. As the two major nuclear powers, we have a special responsibility to deal with that change. 
I believe that two possible roads lie before us. There is a road of competition and even confrontation. Any effort by either of our nations to exploit the turbulence that exists in various parts of the world pushes us towards that road. The United States can and will protect its vitalinterests if this becomes the route we must follow. 
But there is another way, Mr. President-the path of restraint and, where possible, cooperation. This is the path we prefer. 
I hope, Mr. President, that detente, which has been growing in Europe because of your great work, can now encompass other regions of the world. I hope that we can work together so that the rules of restraint, the mutual respect accorded each other's interests, and the recognition of the danger of unbridled competition will lead to an even more stable peace in Europe and can progressively be applied to other troubled regions of our planet. 
In southern Africa there is a struggle for racial justice. We Americans know that violence is not the solution, and so we seek peaceful resolution of the conflicts there. 
In Southeast Asia war continues, with national territories being invaded and occupied by foreign troops. We believe the war in Kampuchea can only be ended by the withdrawal of foreign forces and the honoring of national independence and international borders. 
We must all show compassion, Mr. President, for the tens of thousands of suffering people who have been driven from their homes and their homelands. The callous indifference with which the world ignored refugees in Europe in the 1930's must not be repeated in the Asia of the 1970's. 
In the Middle East, Israel and Egypt have taken an historic step toward a comprehensive peace. Thirty years of hatred had brought only war and terrorism. Only the courage of Egyptian and Israeli leaders has now enabled us to start down the road of a comprehensive peace. 
On all these major international questions the United States stands for the peaceful reconciliation of differences and against the use of force. So, too, we stand for measures to control the instruments of war. 
The SALT agreement which we will sign here tomorrow provides a good foundation, one that will be strengthened by the other arms control initiatives that we are pursuing together. 
Let us build on that foundation so that we can narrow our differences in a spirit of respect for the independence of all nations and the value of every human being. 
Let us both agree never to use offensive weapons against any nation in an act of aggression. 
Let us discourage the use of foreign forces in troubled regions of the world and encourage the peaceful settlement of disputes among the people who are directly. involved. 
Mr. President, in all the world's history, no two nations have ever had a greater responsibility to act with restraint and to seek mutual accommodation than do the United States and the Soviet Union. We do have many differences of history, ideology, and economic and social systems.
Mr. President, we are both concerned about the future, and I am sure that with honesty and good will we can make progress toward a safer and more peaceful world. 
Now, Mr. President, I would like to propose a toast: First of all, to my friend, President Brezhnev; secondly, to the heroic people of the Soviet Union; and thirdly, to our strong, determined, constant, unswerving commitment toward peace in the world and a control of all weapons.



Vienna Summit Meeting Remarks of President Brezhnev and President Carter on Signing the Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms. 
June 18, 1979

PRESIDENT CARTER. Mr. President, fellow citizens of the world: 
Unfortunately, in the past the most powerful currents of history have often been the ones which swept nations to war. Yet as we look back on the causes of so many wars, we can see times when a more watchful course, even a small careful shift, might have guided nations that much better, that much further in the ways of peace. That is the purpose of what we have done here today in Vienna in signing this treaty. 
Today, the threat of nuclear holocaust still hangs over us, as it has for more than 30 years. Our two nations are now armed with thousands of nuclear weapons, each capable of causing devastation beyond measure and beyond imagination. Several other nations now have nuclear arms, and even more have the ability to develop the same destructive weapons. Weapons technology has continued to advance and so have the dangers and the obvious need to control and to regulate this arms competition. 
The strategic arms limitation talks, which have gone on for nearly 10 years without interruption, represent the realization that a nuclear arms competition without shared rules and without verifiable limits and without a continuing dialog would be an invitation to disaster. Such an unrestrained competition would tempt fate in the future and would insult our intelligence and threaten the very existence of humanity. 
This prospect is a challenge to our courage and to our creativity. If we cannot control the power to destroy, we can neither guide our own fate nor preserve our own future. 
Like SALT I, the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, and the Limited Test Ban before it, this SALT II treaty is based on the real security needs of our two nations. It will not end the continuing need for military strength and for readiness on both sides. But SALT II does place important, new limits on both the number and the quality of nuclear arms. And it has allowed us to continue on course toward a safer world with even more substantial limitations and reductions in SALT III. We cannot interrupt nor endanger this process. 
I, as President, am entrusted with the security of the United States of America. I would never take any action that would jeopardize that sacred trust. President Brezhnev, you and I both have children and grandchildren, and we want them to live and to live in peace. We have both worked hard to give our own and our own nations' children that security. 
We realize that no one treaty, no one meeting can guarantee the future safety of our nations. In the end, peace can be won only if we have pursued it and struggled tenaciously to keep the peace all along. Yet, this fight for peace has often seemed the most difficult victory to win. 
Here today, as we set very careful limits on our power, we draw boundaries around our fears of one another. As we begin to control our fears, we can better ensure our future. 
We can now continue to explore the planets. We can discover the essence of matter. We can find the power to preserve ourselves and to preserve our Earth. 
Each of us has only one nation. We both share the same world. Not one nation on this Earth, not one people, not one single human being is harmed or threatened or deprived by this victory in the battle for peace. Indeed, a victory is here today for all. 
In our lifetime, we have learned to make war by unlocking the atom—the power of creation itself. To make peace, we must limit our use of that power by sharing our courage, our wisdom, and our faith. These fundamental strengths of humankind have brought us to this very table today. 
In setting our hands to this treaty, we set our nations on a safer course. We've labored long to make SALT II a safe and useful chart toward the future. Let us pledge now, all together, to use this treaty as we continue our passage to peace.



Address Delivered Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the Vienna Summit Meeting
June 18, 1979

The truth of the nuclear age is that the United States and the Soviet Union must live in peace, or we may not live at all. 
From the beginning of history, the fortunes of men and nations were made and unmade in unending cycles of war and peace. Combat was often the measure of human courage. Willingness to risk war was the mark of statecraft. My fellow Americans, that pattern of war must now be broken forever. 
Between nations armed with thousands of thermonuclear weapons—each one capable of causing unimaginable destruction-there can be no more cycles of both war and peace. There can only be peace. 
About 2 hours ago, I returned from 3 days of intensive talks with President Leonid Brezhnev of the Soviet Union. I come here tonight to meet with you in a spirit of patience, of hope, and of reason and responsibility. 
Patience—because the way is long and hard, and the obstacles ahead are at least as great as those that have been overcome in the last 30 years of diligent and dedicated work. 
Hope—because I'm thankful to be able to report to you tonight that real progress has been made. 
Reason and responsibility—because both will be needed in full measure if the promise which has been awakened in Vienna is to be fulfilled and the way is to be opened for the next phase in the struggle for a safe and a sane Earth. 
Nothing will more strongly affect the outcome of that struggle than the relationship between the two predominant military powers in the world, the United States of America and the Soviet Union. 
The talks in Vienna were important in themselves. But their truest significance was as a part of a process—a process that, as you well know, began long before I became President. 
This is the 10th time since the end of World War II when the leader of the United States and the leader of the Soviet Union have met at a summit conference. During these past 3 days, we've moved closer to a goal of stability and security in Soviet-American relationships. 
That has been the purpose of American policy ever since the rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union became a central fact in international relations more than a generation ago at the end of World War II. 
With the support of the Congress of the United States and with the support of the people of this Nation, every President throughout this period has sought to reduce the most dangerous elements of the Soviet-American competition. 
While the United States still had an absolute nuclear monopoly, President Truman sought to place control of the atomic bomb under international authority. President Eisenhower made the first efforts to control nuclear testing. President Kennedy negotiated with the Soviet Union prohibition against atmospheric testing of nuclear explosives. President Johnson broadened the area of negotiations for the first time to include atomic weapons themselves. President Nixon concluded the first strategic arms limitation agreement, SALT I. President Ford negotiated the Vladivostok accords. You can see that this is a vital and a continuing process. 
Later this week I will deliver to the United States Senate the complete and signed text of the second strategic arms limitation agreement, SALT II. 
This treaty is the product of 7 long years of tough, painstaking negotiation under the leadership of three different Presidents. When ratified, it will be a truly national achievement—an achievement of the Executive and of the Congress, an achievement of civilians and of our military leaders, of liberals and conservatives, of Democrats and Republicans. 
Of course, SALT II will not end the competition between the United States and the Soviet Union. That competition is based on fundamentally different visions of human society and human destiny. As long as that basic difference persists, there will always be some degree of tension in the relationship between our two countries. The United States has no fear of this rivalry. But we want it to be peaceful. 
I'm any age, such rivalry risks degeneration into war. But our age is unique, for the terrible power of nuclear weapons has created an incentive that never existed before for avoiding war. This tendency transcends even the very deep differences of politics and philosophy. In the age of the hydrogen bomb, there is no longer any meaningful distinction between global war and global suicide. 
Our shared understanding of these realities has given the world an interval of peace—a kind of a strange peace-marked by tension, marked by danger, marked even sometimes by regional conflict, but a kind of peace nonetheless. In the 27 years before Hiroshima, the leading powers of the world were twice engulfed in total war. In the 34 years since Hiroshima, humanity has by no means been free of armed conflict. Yet, at least we have avoided a world war. 
Yet this kind of twilight peace carries the ever-present danger of a catastrophic nuclear war, a war that in horror and destruction and massive death would dwarf all the combined wars of man's long and bloody history. 
We must prevent such a war. We absolutely must prevent such a war. 
To keep the peace, to prevent the war, we must have strong military forces, we must have strong alliances, we must have a strong national resolve—so strong that no potential adversary would dare be tempted to attack our country. We have that strength. And the strength of the United States is not diminishing; the strength of our great country is growing, and I thank God for it. 
Yet, for these same reasons—in order to keep the peace—we must prevent an uncontrolled and pointless nuclear arms race that would damage the security of all countries, including our own, by exposing the world to an ever greater risk of war through instability and through tension and through uncertainty about the future. That's why the new strategic arms limitation treaty is so important. 
SALT II will undoubtedly become the most exhaustively discussed and debated treaty of our time, perhaps of all times. The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and man)' others who hammered out this treaty will testify for it before the Senate, in detail and in public. As President of our country, I will explain it throughout our Nation to every American who will listen. This treaty will withstand the most severe scrutiny because it is so clearly in the interest of American security and of world peace. 
SALT II is the most detailed, farreaching, comprehensive treaty in the history of arms control. Its provisions are interwoven by the give-and-take of the long negotiating process. Neither side obtained everything it sought. But the package that did emerge is a carefully balanced whole, and it will make the world a safer place for both sides. 
The restrictions on strategic nuclear weapons are complex, because these weapons represent the highest development of the complicated technical skills of two great nations. But the basic realities underlying this treaty and the thrust of the treaty itself are not so complex. When all is said and done, SALT II is a matter of common sense. 
The SALT II treaty reduces the danger of nuclear war. For the first time, it places equal ceilings on the strategic arsenals of both sides, ending a previous numerical imbalance in favor of the Soviet Union. 
SALT II preserves our options to build the forces we need to maintain that strategic balance. The treaty enhances our own ability to monitor what the Soviet Union is doing. And it leads directly to the next step in more effectively controlling nuclear weapons. 
Again, SALT II does not end the arms competition. But it does make that competition safer and more predictable, with clear rules and verifiable limits, where otherwise there would be no rules and there would be no limits. 
It's in our interest because it slows down—it even reverses—the momentum of the Soviet arms buildup that has been of such great concern to all of us. Under this new treaty, the Soviet Union will be held to a third fewer strategic missile launchers and bombers by 1985 than they would have simply by continuing to build at their present rate. 
With SALT II, the numbers of warheads on missiles, their throw-weight, and the qualitative development of new missiles will all be limited. The Soviet Union will have to destroy or dismantle some 250 strategic missile systems—systems such as nuclear submarines armed with relatively new missiles, built in the early 1970's, and aircraft will have to be destroyed by the Soviet Union carrying their largest multimegaton bomb. Once dismantled, under the provisions of SALT II, these systems cannot be replaced. 
By contrast, no operational United States forces will have to be reduced. 
For one Soviet missile alone—the SS18—the SALT II limits will mean that some 6,000 fewer Soviet nuclear warheads can be built and aimed at our country. SALT II limits severely for the first time the number of warheads that can be mounted on these very large missiles of the Soviet Union, cutting down their actual potential by 6,000. 
With or without SALT II, we must modernize and strengthen our own strategic forces—and we are doing so—but SALT II will make this task easier, surer, and less expensive. 
The agreement constrains none of the reasonable programs we've planned to improve our own defenses. Moreover, it helps us to respond more effectively to our most pressing strategic problem—the prospective vulnerability in the 1980's of our land-based silo missiles. The MX missile, which has been so highly publicized, is permitted under SALT II. Yet its verifiable mobile development system will enhance stability as it deprives an attacker of the confidence that a successful first strike could be launched against the United States ICBM's, or intercontinental ballistic missiles. 
Without the SALT II limits, the Soviet Union could build so many warheads that any land-based system, fixed or mobile, could be jeopardized. 
With SALT II, we can concentrate more effort on preserving the balance in our own conventional and NATO forces. Without the SALT II treaty, we would be forced to spend extra billions and billions of dollars each year in a dangerous, destabilizing, unnecessary nuclear arms race. 
As I have said many times, SALT II is not based on trust. Compliance will be assured by our own Nation's means of verification, including extremely sophisticated • satellites, powerful electronic systems, and a vast intelligence network. Were the Soviet Union to take enormous risk of trying to violate this treaty in any way that might affect the strategic balance, there is no doubt that we would discover it in time to respond fully and effectively. 
It's the SALT II agreement itself which forbids concealment measures-many of them for the first time—forbids interference with our monitoring, and forbids the encryption or the encoding of crucial missile-test information. A violation of this part of the agreement—which we would quickly detect—would be just as serious as a violation of the limits on strategic weapons themselves. 
Consider these prospects for a moment. Suppose the Soviet leaders build a thousand additional missiles, above and beyond the ones they have now, many new, advanced, and of a formidable design. This can happen only if the SALT II treaty is defeated. 
Suppose the Soviet leaders wanted to double the number of warheads on all their existing missiles; suppose they wanted to triple the annual production rate of the Backfire bomber and greatly improve its characteristics in range and payload. These kinds of things can hap. pen only if the SALT II treaty is defeated. 
Suppose the Soviet Union leaders encrypt all data on their missile tests; suppose they conceal their nuclear launcher deployment rate and hide all their existing missile systems. Those things can happen only if the SALT II treaty is defeated. 
SALT II is very important. But it's more than a single arms control agreement; it's part of a long, historical process of gradually reducing the danger of nuclear war—a process that we in this room must not undermine. 
The SALT II treaty must be judged on its own merits. And on its own merits, it is a substantial gain for national security for us and the people whom we represent, and it's a gain for international stability. But it would be the height of irresponsibility to ignore other possible consequences of a failure to ratify this treaty. 
These consequences would include: greatly increased spending for strategic nuclear arms which we do not need; greater uncertainty about the strategic balance between ourselves and the Soviet Union; vastly increased danger of nuclear proliferation among other nations of the world who do not presently have nuclear explosives; increased political tension between the East and the West, with greater likelihood that other inevitable problems would escalate into serious super power confrontations. 
Rejection would also be a damaging blow to the Western Alliance. All of our European and other allies, including especially those who are most directly and courageously facing Soviet power, all of them strongly support SALT II. If the Senate were to reject the treaty, America's leadership of this alliance would be compromised, and the alliance itself would be severely shaken. 
In short, SALT II is not a favor we are doing for the Soviet Union. It's a deliberate, calculated move that we are making as a matter of self-interest for the United States—a move that happens to serve the goals of both security and survival, that strengthens both the military position of our own country and the cause of world peace. 
And, of course, SALT II is the absolutely indispensable precondition for moving on to much deeper and more significant cuts under SALT III. 
Although we will not begin negotiations on SALT III until SALT II goes into effect, I discussed other nuclear control issues with President Brezhnev, such as much deeper mutual reductions in nuclear weapon inventories, stricter limit on the production of nuclear warheads and launchers, enhanced survivability and stability of missile systems that are authorized under existing SALT agreement, prenotification about missile tests and mass use or exercises of strategic bombers, and limits and controls on types of missiles which are not presently covered under any SALT agreement 
Though SALT is the most important single part of the complex relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union, it is only a part. The U.S.-Soviet relationship covers a broad range of issues, some of which bear directly on our joint responsibility to reduce the possibility of war. President Brezhnev and I discussed these issues in Vienna this morning in a long private session with only the interpreters present. 
I undertook all these discussions with a firm confidence in the strength of America. Militarily, our power is second to none. I'm determined that it will remain so. We will continue to have military power to deter any possible aggression, to maintain security of our country, and to permit the continuing search for peace and for the control of arms from a position of strength. We must have that strength so that we will never be afraid to negotiate for peace. 
Economically, despite serious problems of energy and inflation, we are by far the most productive nation on Earth. Along with our allies, our economic strength is three times greater than that of the Soviet Union and all its allies. 
Diplomatically, we've strengthened our friendships with Western Europe and Japan, with China and India, with Israel and Egypt, and with the countries of the Third World. Our alliances are stronger because they are based not on force, but on common interests and often on common values. 
Politically, our democratic system is an enormous advantage, not only to each of us as individuals who enjoy freedom but to all of us together because our Nation is stronger. Our support of human rights, backed by the concrete example of the American society, has aligned us with peoples all over the world who yearn for freedom. 
These strengths are such that we need fear no other country. This confidence in our Nation helped me in Vienna as we discussed specific areas of potential, either direct or indirect, confrontation around the world, including places like southern Africa or the Middle East. 
For instance, I made it clear to President Brezhnev that Cuban military activities in Africa, sponsored by or supported by the Soviet Union, and also the growing Cuban involvement in the problems of Central America and the Caribbean can only have a negative impact on U.S.-Soviet relations. 
Our strength, ourresolve, our determination, our willingness to protect our own interests, our willingness to discuss these problems with others are the best means by which we can resolve these differences and alleviate these tests successfully for our people. 
Despite disagreements, our exchange in Vienna was useful, because it enabled us to clarify our positions directly to each other, face-to-face, and, thus, to reduce the chances of future miscalculations on both sides. 
And, finally, I would like to say to you that President Brezhnev and I developed a better sense of each other as leaders and as men. The responsibility for many decisions involving the very future of the world rests on me as the leader of this great country, and it's vital that my judgments be based on as much firsthand knowledge and experience as possible. 
In these conversations, I was careful to leave no doubt about either my desire for peace or my determination to defend the interests of the United States and of our allies. I believe that together we laid a foundation on which we can build a more stable relationship between our two countries. 
We will seek to broaden the areas of cooperation, and we will compete where and when we must. We know how determined the Soviet leaders are to secure their interests, and we are equally determined to protect and to advance our own. 
We look to the future—all of us Americans look to the future—with anticipation and with confidence, not only because of the vast material powers of our Nation but because of the power of our Nation's ideas and ideals and principles. The ultimate future of the human race lies not with tyranny, but with freedom; not with war, but with peace. 
With that kind of vision to sustain us, we must now complete the work of ratifying this treaty, a major step in the limitation of nuclear weapons and a major step toward world peace. And then we may turn our energies not only to further progress along that path but also more urgently to our own domestic agenda in the knowledge that we have strengthened the security of a nation which we love and also strengthened peace for all the world.



Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Yoshio Hori and Yoshiki Hidaka of the Japan Broadcasting, Corporation (NHK). 
June 20, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. We believe that this new agreement between ourselves and the Soviet Union will not only help our own two nations to have a more peaceful future, but also will be a great contribution to the entire world to limit armaments and to lead towards peace. 
THE PRESIDENT. There is no doubt that both we and the Soviet Union are determined to control armaments in the future. Both nations will stay strong. My most important responsibility is to guarantee the security of the United States of America and also the security of our allies and to protect our interests. So, within a realm of strength, we will reduce armaments on both sides, particularly nuclear weapons, and we hope that other nations will join us in this commitment in years to come
I think that our new relationship with China can be a stabilizing factor, and not only between China and Japan, China and the other Asian nations, but also between China and the Soviet Union. We want to see peaceful relationships between countries who have in the past been potential adversaries



Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Members of the Japanese Press. 
June 20, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. We have no fear of Soviet military presence there. We are concerned about a buildup whenever we consider it to be excessive beyond what is required for Soviet security. I discussed the South Vietnamese question with President Brezhnev this week, and particularly the Soviet presence there, both ships and airplanes. He assured me personally that there would be no establishment of Soviet bases in South Vietnam and that the present ship and plane use of the ports and airports is of a routine nature. 
We will maintain American military presence in the Western Pacific, adequate to protect American interests and to protect the interest of our allies. I think in our alliances—with South Korea, with Japan, with New Zealand, with Australia, new leases on Philippine bases, our growing friendship with the ASEAN group, the honoring of their independence, the normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China, plus the new SALT agreement with the Soviet Union and the prospect for better relations between ourselves and the Soviet Union brought about by the summit conference this past weekend-all of those factors combined lead me to expect increased stability in the Far East



Korean and East Asian Issues Questions and Answers for Publication in the Orient Press
June 21, 1979

A. Let me state our policy toward North Korea quite simply. We are prepared to participate in discussions with North Korean officials aimed at reducing tensions on the Korean peninsula, but only if officials of the South Korean Government are full and equal participants. We have also said that to promote an atmosphere conducive to the reduction of tensions, the United States Government is prepared to improve our relations officially and unofficially with North Korea, provided that there are parallel improvements by the Soviet Union or China in relations with South Korea. We are not hostile toward North Korea. However, we are not going to take unilateral steps which are unreciprocated by North Korea's major allies, nor allow ourselves to become manipulated in a manner which ignores the rights and sovereignty of our ally, the Republic of Korea. We recognize that solution of the problems on the Korean peninsula can only be resolved through the direct involvement of the Governments of both North and South Korea. 
A. There are no discussions of Korean arms transfers with Soviet representatives in Vienna


Elmendorf Air Force Base, Alaska Remarks at a Reception. 
June 23, 1979

I've just come back from concluding an agreement with the Soviet Union. It's not the first wonderful agreement we've worked out with Russia, as you well know. [Laughter] But the times press on us. And I think Alaska, our most beautiful State, is also a State where the youth and the vigor and the dynamism and the strength of our Nation is most vividly demonstrated. 
Last weekend in Vienna, in our negotiations with the Soviet Union, I negotiated from a position of political strength and military strength. We are the strongest nation on Earth


Shimoda, Japan Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
June 27, 1979

One of the responsibilities of the leaders of nations like my own and like yours is to search for better degrees of understanding. Not much more than a week ago, I was in Vienna, Austria, meeting with President Brezhnev and other leaders of the Soviet Union to search for ways to control nuclear weapons and to have peace and friendship between the Soviet Union and the United States


Bardstown, Kentucky Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
July 31, 1979

Since I've been in office, we have substantially strengthened our own Nation's military commitment to our Allies in NATO, in Western Europe. We've got new friends that were formerly intimate allies with the Soviet Union. Egypt is a typical example. You can look at the whole coast of Asia now, from South Korea all the way down around to India; in almost every instance, we have a stronger allegiance and a closer friendship with them than we had 2 years ago, 5 years ago, or 10 years ago

It would not help us to violate ourcommitment to Panama, to have the Soviet Union and Cuba come in and try to change that government into a Communist government. Since we ratified the Panama Canal treaties, the Panamanians have had a free election; they have chosen 500-and-something members of their Congress. The Congress members have chosen a brand new President, and Panama is on the road now toward a true democracy

The Soviets are tough negotiators, but so are we. And there is no doubt in my mind that no matter what level of defense spending we have, whether it's exactly right, $5 billion too low, $5 billion too high, we need the SALT II agreement, the treaty ratified. But what I'm going to do as President is work with the United States Senate and the Congress to have the SALT II agreement, which will give us peace; cut down on the nuclear arms race; let us monitor what the Soviets are doing, control the proliferation of nuclear weapons throughout all the rest of the world; stop the Soviets' buildup, which has been faster than ours in the past—all that will come with SALT II. And in addition to that, have a strong defense to make sure our Nation is always as strong as or stronger than the Soviet Union no matter what happens


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
August 10, 1979

The other thing I'd like to say is that we have an international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation study that we initiated in the economic summit conference in London in 1977. Its report will be completed this year. It's been a report evolved by the representatives of more than 50 nations, including the Soviet Union, South Africa, all of the Western allies and so forth. And I would guess that when this report is completed that it would be at the forefront of our agenda when we have our economic summit conference next year in Venice



