MID 137901, US v North Korea, 10 jun to 10-Jul-64 to 19-Oct-69

311 - "Two Threats to World Peace" - Remarks in Omaha on the Occasion of the Sending of the Five-Millionth Ton of Grain to India
June 30, 1966

Sixteen years ago this month, North Korea attacked South Korea. By armed invasion across a national border, a Communist country attempted to conquer and overrun its neighbor. 
The United States of America recognized this kind of aggression immediately and we acted. North Korean aggression failed. Why? Because President Harry S. Truman and the American people, working with the forces of the United Nations, supporting that great leader, had the courage to help the people of South Korea protect their homes and protect their country.
Those people are helping us in Vietnam now. 
Today South Korea is still free and thousands of its young men are again fighting side by side with the Americans to defend another small country from being swallowed up by a more powerful Communist neighbor



345 - Remarks at the Dedication of the AMVETS National Headquarters Building.
July 23, 1966

The whole world could watch the Kaiser's troops marching across Belgium. The whole world could see Hitler's tanks sweeping through Poland. And the whole world could see the Communist army of North Korea hammering south toward Seoul. 
In each case, aggression was open, was obvious, and was swift. 
In each case, the valor of helped stop in their tracks the would-be conquerors



561 - Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony at City Hall Plaza, Seoul, Korea.
October 31, 1966

Sixteen years ago an invading army from the North swept down upon your land. Long and tragic months followed, bringing grief to thousands upon thousands of good Korean families. First alone, and then under the United Nations, President Truman committed my country to help Korea turn back the aggressor. But months passed before the tide of battle could be clearly reversed, and 3 years before an armistice was finally reached


562 - The President's Toast at a Dinner Given in His Honor by President and Mrs. Park of Korea.
October 31, 1966

Together they recalled the time 16 years ago when a ruthless invader rolled through your streets, bringing terror and destruction to an innocent people. They recalled the long, hard fighting that drove him back into the North and that made this Republic free again. They remembered the years after the war when the task of reconstruction seemed too great for any people to accomplish. So much had to be rebuilt in this broken land; so much had to be changed; so much had to be created out of limited resources


565 - Remarks Before the Korean National Assembly, Seoul, Korea.
November 2, 1966

Side by side we fought with you to protect your fight to be sovereign and independent. We had total casualties of 157,000--33,000 killed in combat, more than 20,000 killed in noncombat, or total dead of 53,625. While our total casualties were 157,000, the Korean people suffered civilian casualties of perhaps 2 million. Who will ever know how many children starved? How many refugees lie in unmarked graves along the roads south? There is hardly a Korean family which did not lose a loved one in the assault from the North. 
This was the cost--the terrible cost--of protecting the Republic of Korea from Communist aggression. And as I meet with President Park and see your countryside and your people, and then I look out into the faces of this Assembly, I know that these men did not die in vain



577 - The President's News Conference
November 4, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. We have had some increased incidents there, of late. We are filing a very strong protest for this totally unjustified murder of six of our men. 
We will make the strongest representations. We would hope that it is not indicative of any continued desire on the part of the North Koreans to violate the terms of the armistice. 
Certainly the United States of America does not plan to violate the terms of that armistice and we hope they won't either



3 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 10, 1967

Sixteen years ago we and others stopped another kind of aggression--this time it was in Korea. Imagine how different Asia might be today if we had failed to act when the Communist army of North Korea marched south. The Asia of tomorrow will be far different because we have said in Vietnam, as we said 16 years ago in Korea: "This far and no further." 



397 - Remarks to Representatives of National Fraternal Organizations.
September 22, 1967

You may remember them in 1950, when the North Korean Army smashed across the 38th parallel, and again in 1962 when the missiles were brought into Cuba



35 - The President's Address to the Nation: The Situation With North Korea.
January 26, 1968

Over the past 15 months the North Koreans have pursued a stepped-up campaign of violence against South Korean and the American troops in the area of the Demilitarized Zone. 
Armed raider teams in very large numbers have been sent into South Korea to engage in sabotage and assassination. 
On January 19, a 31-man team of North Korean raiders invaded Seoul with the object of murdering the President of the Republic of Korea. 
In many of these aggressive actions, Korean and American soldiers have been killed and wounded. The North Koreans are apparently attempting to intimidate the South Koreans and are trying to interrupt the growing spirit of confidence and progress in the Republic of Korea. 
These attacks may also be an attempt by the Communists to divert South Korean and United States military resources which together are now successfully resisting aggression in Vietnam. 
This week the North Koreans committed yet another wanton and aggressive act by seizing an American ship and its crew in international waters. Clearly, this cannotbeaccepted. 
We are doing two things: First, we are very shortly today taking the question before the Security Council of the United Nations. The best result would be for the whole world community to persuade North Korea to return our ship and our men, and to stop the dangerous course of aggression against South Korea. 
We have been making other diplomatic efforts as well. We shall continue to use every means available to find a prompt and a peaceful solution to the problem. 
Second, we have taken and we are taking certain precautionary measures to make sure that our military forces are prepared for any contingency that might arise in this area. 
These actions do not involve in any way a reduction of our forces in Vietnam. 
I hope that the North Koreans will recognize the gravity of the situation which they have created. I am confident that the American people will exhibit in this crisis, as they have in other crises, the determination and unity which are necessary to see it through. Thank you very much



51 - The President's News Conference
February 2, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We understand from neutral nations and from reports from North Korea that the men are being treated well; that those who have suffered wounds are receiving treatment; that the body of the man who died is being held. We have received those reports and examined them. That is about the extent of the information we have on it. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I am not. I don't want to hold out any hopes on information that I have that is not justified. All I can say is that these things take time. 
The most comparable incident, I am told by the military people, to this one was the RB-47 that went down in 1960 and it took some 7 months of negotiations to get our pilots back.5 
We are exploring every diplomatic means that is available to us. We have our best military men reviewing all that happened and, as I said in my statement to you and to the country some time ago, we are taking such precautionary steps as we may think the military situation justifies
We are in very close touch with the President of that country. I think he understands how we feel. 
I would be less than frank if I didn't tell you I was deeply concerned about 83 Americans, as I am sure the President of Korea is. 
I am also deeply concerned about the situation in South Korea and the obligation we have there. We are going to be equal to that obligation. We are going to be true to ourcommitment. 
We have some 50,000 men there. We are going to see that not only are they adequately informed and supplied, but that all of our plans take into consideration the recommendations of that Government that we have found to be not only a friendly Government but an effective one--and one of our best allies. 
I have great respect for the President of South Korea and his judgments. They are being received, considered, and acted upon every day. 
I see nothing in any of these developments to justify a concern on the part of South Korea or America that there is a strain in our relations. I think that is largely talk and speculation and so-called reports. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, there has been a meeting between representatives of North Korea and the United States. We hope there will be additional meetings. 
These meetings have not produced any satisfactory results as far as the United States is concerned. 
I know of nothing that I should add to that statement. And I don't plan to.




169 - The President's News Conference
March 30, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We are always glad to be able to get the release of our prisoners and to be able to reciprocate the actions they take. 
I don't know just how to describe those releases in your terms. You will have to draw your own conclusions there. We are pleased that those exchanges have worked out to the extent they have. We would like to see more of them


223 - The President's News Conference
May 3, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We have nothing to report that is new. Secretary Katzenbach,6 the day before yesterday, and Secretary Rusk, yesterday, reported all of the information we have in connection with the Pueblo situation. 
We have made it clear to the North Korean authorities that we think these people should not be held; that they should be released; that we will carefully examine all of the evidence following their release.
If there is any indication that we have acted improperly, or have violated their boundaries, we will take appropriate action. 
That is where the matter stands. We think the next step is up to them. 
We hope that upon careful reflection, they will release the men. Then the United States will fairly and impartially look at all the facts available and take a position in keeping with those facts


156 - The President's News Conference
April 18, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Cormier [Frank Cormier, Associated Press], first, I think a word with regard to the facts in this case: As was pointed out in the protest that was filed at Pandemonium yesterday and also in the Defense Department statement, the plane involved was an unarmed Constellation, propeller-driven. 
The mission was a reconnaissance mission which at no time took the plane closer to the shores of North Korea than 40 miles. At the time the plane was shot down, all of the evidence that we have indicates that it was shot down approximately 90 miles from the shores of North Korea while it was moving outward, aborting the mission on orders that had been received. We knew this, based on our radar. 
What is also even more important, the North Koreans knew it, based on their radar. Therefore, this attack was unprovoked. It was deliberate. It was without warning. The protest has been filed. The North Koreans have not responded. Now a word with regard to why we have such missions in the Sea of Japan. As you ladies and gentlemen are aware, there are 56,000 American troops stationed in South Korea. Those 56,000 men are the responsibility of the President of the United States as Commander in Chief. 
In recent weeks and months, in fact going back over the last 2 or 3 years, but particularly in recent weeks and months, North Korea has threatened military action against South Korea and against our forces in South Korea. The number of incidents has increased. 
It is the responsibility of the Commander in Chief to protect the security of those men. That is why, going back over 20 years and throughout the period of this administration being continued, we have had a policy of reconnaissance flights in the Sea of Japan similar to this flight. This year we have had already 190 of these flights without incident, without threat, without warning at all. 
Now the question is: What do we do about these flights in the future? They were discontinued immediately after this incident occurred. 
I have today ordered that these flights be continued. They will be protected. This is not a threat; it is simply a statement of fact. 
As the Commander in Chief of our Armed Forces I cannot and will not ask our men to serve in Korea, and I cannot and will not ask our men to take flights like this in unarmed planes without providing protection. That will be the case. 
Looking to the future, as far as what we do will depend upon the circumstances. It; will depend upon what is done as far as North Korea is concerned, its reaction to the protest, and also any other developments that occur as we continue these flights.
Our intelligence and, of course, no one can be sure here, indicates that the Soviet Union was not aware that this attack was to be made. North Korea is not a nation that is predictable in terms of its actions. It is perhaps more than any other nation in the Communist bloc completely out of the control of either the Soviet Union or, for that matter, Communist China. That, at least, is our intelligence estimate at this time. 
Now, as far as other matters that entered into this interim decision, and I emphasize it as an interim decision, I have concluded that the United States must face up to the fact that intelligence gathering-intelligence gathering that does not involve overflights, that does not involve interdiction of another nation's air space, or moving into its waters--here where intelligence people are involved, we recognize that they are necessarily subject to whateveraction can or should be taken by another nation to defend itself. 
But when planes of the United States, or ships of the United States, in intelligence gathering, are in international water or in international air space, they are not fair game. They will not be in the future. I state that as a matter of fact, and that was the basis for this interim decision
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the Pueblo incident was quite different in two respects. One, there was some uncertainty for some time as to where the Pueblo was. Present indications are that the Pueblo was in international waters. But there was a more uncertain factor. 
There was no uncertainty whatever as to where this plane was, because we know what their radar showed. We, incidentally, know what the Russian radar showed. And all three radars showed exactly the same thing. 
Let me also say that there is no question of what they claim as their air space. Some of you, of course, know the confusion and, as a matter of fact, the confrontation we are having with Peru about the 200-mile limit.3 North Korea claims only 12 miles as its limit, so we were at least 28 miles away at the very closest point. 
Also, with regard to the Pueblo, in the case of the Pueblo the North Koreans had warned and threatened the Pueblo for a period of several weeks before they seized it. In the case of these flights, they have been going on, as I have indicated, for years, and during this administration, without incident, 190 of them have occurred this year. 
Under these circumstances, it was a completely surprise attack in every sense of the word and, therefore, did not give us the opportunity for protective action that I would have taken had it been threatened


279 - Informal Remarks in Guam With Newsmen
July 25, 1969

As we look at Asia today, we see that the major world power which adopts a very aggressive attitude and a belligerent attitude in its foreign policy, Communist China, of course, is in Asia, and we find that the two minor world powers--minor, although they do have significant strength as we have learned--that most greatly threaten the peace of the world, that adopt the most belligerent foreign policy, are in Asia, North Korea and, of course, North Vietnam



337 - Remarks of Welcome in San Francisco to President Chung Hee Park of South Korea.
August 21, 1969

The Republic of Korea maintains armed forces that are strong enough to assume the major share of the responsibility for defending Korea against the threat from the north


338 - Toasts of the President and President Park at a State Dinner in San Francisco.
August 21, 1969

They proved their courage fighting for their own freedom in a war that ended 16 years ago. They are proving it by fighting alongside the persons of the United States and those of South Vietnam and other countries in the war in Vietnam with 50,000 Koreans there. And they prove it by maintaining one of the largest armed forces in the world in order to meet the threat which is posed against them in the north.











