MID 217601, US v Greece, 21 mar to 20-Apr-83 to 10-Mar-84

Remarks at White House Ceremonies Marking the 15th Anniversary of the Special Olympics 
June 12, 1983

First of all, welcome to the White House. And to those of you from Chile, Greece, Japan, and Kenya: Welcome to the United States. I hope you all enjoyed seeing "Superman III," starring Christopher Reeve. And isn't it great to have Christopher—Superman-as a coach? This looks like it might be so much fun, I wish I'd worn my track clothes


Radio Address to the Nation on the Soviet Attack on a Korean Civilian Airliner 
September 17, 1983

Scandinavian Airlines has suspended flights within Soviet airspace for 60 days. Norwegian pilots and air traffic controllers are boycotting all air service between Norway and the Soviet Union. With the exception of France, Greece, and Turkey, all the NATO nations and Japan have temporarily suspended civil air traffic between their respective nations and the Soviet Union. Even neutral Switzerland and pilots in Finland have joined the general boycott. Australia and New Zealand are also taking strong measures in the area of civil aviation


Remarks During a Conference Call With Chancellor Helmut Kohl of the Federal Republic of Germany and Crewmembers of the Space Shuttle Columbia 
December 5, 1983

The President. Greetings from Washington. Chancellor Kohl is with us all the way from Athens, Greece; along with you astronauts hovering in space, with me here in Washington, and the whole world listening, this is one heck of a conference call


Remarks on Signing the Bill of Rights Day and Human Rights Day and Week Proclamation 
December 9, 1983

In honoring these heroes today, we proclaim our confidence that good and decent people will triumph over evil. Dictatorships can pass away. On theright, we've seen it happen in recent years, in Spain, in Portugal, in Greece, in Argentina. On the left, totalitarian ideologies that brutalize human beings to rebuild mankind into that which it is not are destined to fail. Totalitarianism on the left, just like nazism before it, will be disgarded by a disgusted humanity. Much depends on us, but we can be confident that the tide of history is indeed running on the side of freedom








