MID 218701, US v North Korea, 6 jan to 5-Feb-58 to 17-Oct-61


173 - Statement by the President following the Landing of United States Marines at Beirut.
July 15, 1958

You will remember at the time of the Korean war that the Soviet Government claimed that this was merely a civil war, because the only attack was by North Koreans upon South Koreans. But all the world knew that the North Koreans were armed, equipped and directed from without for the purpose of aggression



198 - The President's News Conference
August 6, 1958

But their history, which includes all of the eastern European nations that they have taken over by force and held by force since the conclusion of World War II, their adventures into North Korea and North Vietnam, all show and point to the fact that the accusation they made should be directed directly to themselves and not to us



261 - Radio and Television Report to the American People Regarding the Situation in the Formosa Straits.
September 11, 1958

They claimed also that the attack by the Communist North Koreans on South Korea was "civil war," and that the United Nations, and the United States, were "aggressors" because they helped South Korea. They said the same about their attack on Viet Nam



302 - Remarks at a Republican Rally at the Kanawha County Airport, Charleston, W. Va.
October 27, 1958

Just this morning I had some news that I think all of you would like to hear: the Chinese communists announced this morning that they have completely evacuated North Korea with their forces. 
This seemingly ends this particular episode, this particular difficulty between the Chinese communists and ourselves in North Korea. And I say "seemingly," because we must be alert, we must be wary, and we must be sure that by their deeds we will give our confidence to people whose word has no longer been such as to inspire our confidence



201 - Address Before the National Assembly of Korea.
June 20, 1960

The prompt and judicious fulfillment of the recently expressed wishes of the Korean people is a momentous challenge. Your friends throughout the world hope and believe you will meet this challenge with courage and with moderation. And success in this undertaking will provide inspiration to your countrymen to. the north who, I earnestly pray will one day join you in a free, united Korea


202 - Remarks at the Headquarters of the Korean Army's Sixth Corps.
June 20, 1960

But in particular, I pay a special tribute to the Armed forces of the Republic of Korea. No one can forget the fortitude and bravery of the Korean Army when, almost 10 years ago this very day, it went into action against Communist aggression from the north. The utmost of self-sacrifice was manifested by the Korean soldiers, and the sailors, and their airmen defending these rugged hills that surround us, sparkling today in their summer beauty, bleak and forbidding in the cold winter months


204 - Remarks in Seoul Upon Leaving for Honolulu.
June 20, 1960

My all too brief stay here in Korea has for me been full of interest and inspiration. I have seen the strength and vigilance of the forces guarding an unnatural boundary which keeps Koreans in the north from their fellow countrymen in the Republic of Korea



138 - Address Before the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
April 20, 1961

Power is the hallmark of this offensive-power and discipline and deceit. The legitimate discontent of yearning people is exploited. The legitimate trappings of self-determination are employed. But once in power, all talk of discontent is repressed, all self-determination disappears, and the promise of a revolution of hope is betrayed, as in Cuba, into a reign of terror. Those who on instruction staged automatic "riots" in the streets of free nations over the efforts of a small group of young Cubans to regain their freedom should recall the long roll call of refugees who cannot now go back--to Hungary, to North Korea, to North Viet-Nam, to East Germany, or to Poland, or to any of the other lands from which a steady stream of refugees pours forth, in eloquent testimony to the cruel oppression now holding sway in their homeland



212 - Remarks at the President's Birthday Dinner in Boston.
May 29, 1961

I go also to Vienna, and I know there are some Americans who wonder why I take that journey. I am only 44, but I have lived in my 44 years through three wars, the First World War, the Second World War, and the Korean War. No one can study the origins of any of those three struggles without realizing the serious miscalculations, the serious misapprehensions, about the possible actions of the other side which existed in the minds of the adversaries which helped bring about all those wars. The War of 1914, where the Austrians gave an ultimatum to Serbia and the Russians then mobilized and the French then in alliance with Russia then mobilized and then the Germans mobilized, and then when the Germans saw the French and the Russians mobilizing attacked through Belgium which brought the British in. One week before the British never would have dreamed they would be at war and I doubt that the French would. No one would have dreamed that two years later the United States would be involved in a war on the continent. In 1939 and 1940, after the loss of Austria and Czechoslovakia, finally the British guaranteed Poland, but there is certainly some evidence that Hitler never believed that the British would come to the assistance of Poland, and he never believed that the United States would again become involved in a great struggle on the plains of Europe. Certainly in the War of 1950 in Korea, the North Koreans never imagined that the United States would come to the assistance, by war-like means, of the Republic of South Korea, and we on our part did not imagine that the Chinese Communists would intervene as we approached to the north of North Korea



222 - Remarks and Question and Answer Period at the Press Luncheon in Paris
June 2, 1961

I said recently that in my lifetime I had been present, alive, during three world wars, and it is impossible to study the origins of each of these struggles without realizing the serious miscalculations which were made by the leaders on both sides. The most recent example was in our own experience in Korea, where the North Koreans did not seem certain that we would respond immediately upon the occasion of their invasion into South Korea, and where there was serious doubt on the part of the United States that the Chinese Communists would intervene as we moved to the north. In the experience of Europe, you have had similar circumstances. Therefore, when responsibility is pressed heavily on anyone to make a judgment, it seems to me useful to have as close an understanding of the view of each side as possible. I think that it is most valuable to talk to those with whom we are allied. I also think it is important that we talk to those who are separated from us, because in the final analysis, heavy decisions rest, constitutionally, upon the President of the United States. He must under some conditions make the final judgment himself, and if my judgment may be more lucid, may be based more on reality as a result of this exchange, then I think the trip will be useful














