MID 17302, US v China, 	23 may to 22-Jun-58 to 19-Dec-58


153 - The President's News Conference
July 2, 1958

Now, I remember when it first came to our intense study and concern years ago, as in the case of China, one thing was always insisted upon: we are trying to get live Americans back; we are not disposed to do anything reckless that would create consequences for them that would be final. 
Now, the cases that come up are not similar in their circumstances. for example, the case in Russia, the case in East Germany, the one in China are entirely different from the one in Cuba. Here it is a dissident portion of the nation which, alleging that this country--and I might say inaccurately--but, nevertheless, alleging that this country has been giving improper support to the government of Cuba, has taken these individuals apparently as hostages to secure some kind of accommodation or support for themselves



173 - Statement by the President following the Landing of United States Marines at Beirut.
July 15, 1958

In the second place what we now see in the Middle East is the same pattern of conquest with which we became familiar during the period of 1945 to 1950. This involves taking over a nation by means of indirect aggression; that is, under the cover of a fomented civil strife the purpose is to put into domestic control those whose real loyalty is to the aggressor. 
It was by such means that the Communists attempted to take over Greece in 1947. That effort was thwarted by the Truman Doctrine. 
It was by such means that the Communists took over Czechoslovakia in 1948. 
It was by such means that the Communists took over the mainland of China in 1949. 
It was by such means that the Communists attempted to take over Korea and Indo China, beginning in 1950. 





213 - The President's News Conference
August 20, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I have never had the question put in that way to me specifically; but I would say yes, we can make international tests unlawful, agree to cease them, all of the countries that are participating in the agreement would have to obey it.
Now, if we didn't, we wouldn't have to put in Mexico either, you see. 
In other words, the other side doesn't have to say every country of the free world would be included. We wouldn't necessarily have to say all the others. But I think that the terms--the agreement would have to be one in which we have confidence that this thing could not be, let's say, abused, or we would have then to do something else. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, we have no evidence that he is doing it. 
Now, we have had reports of comments that are made in the Kremlin and in Moscow, where there has been some rather vociferous denials of that allegation. But I would hesitate to make a real guess on it



222 - The President's News Conference
August 27, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Roberts, you simply cannot make military decisions until after the event reaches you. Now, it might affect it under a whole series of circumstances--but there are all sorts of permutations and combinations of these factors, and I would say you couldn't make any arbitrary answer to that

THE PRESIDENT. Well, again, you talk to a certain extent in hypothetical terms. 
Quite naturally, we are supporting the Nationalist regime; we still recognize it and, as a matter of fact, it is still a member of the Security Council in the United Nations. So we are not going to desert our responsibilities or the statements we have already made. I think that about the best thing that can be said at this moment is the Secretary's letter of about a week ago or something of that kind




261 - Radio and Television Report to the American People Regarding the Situation in the Formosa Straits.
September 11, 1958

Tonight I want to talk to you about the situation, dangerous to peace, which has developed in the Formosa Straits, in the Far East. My purpose is to give you its basic facts and then my conclusions as to our nation's proper course of action. 
To begin, let us remember that traditionally this country and its government have always been passionately devoted to peace with honor, as they are now. We shall never resort to force in settlement of differences except when compelled to do so to defend against aggression and to protect our vitalinterests. 
This means that, in our view, negotiations and conciliation should never be abandoned in favor of force and strife. While we shall never timidly retreat before the threat of armed aggression, we would welcome in the present circumstances negotiations that could have a fruitful result in preserving the peace of the Formosa area and reaching a solution that could be acceptable to all parties concerned including, of course, our ally, the Republic of China. 
On the morning of August 23rd the Chinese Communists opened a severe bombardment of Quemoy, an island in the Formosa Straits off the China Coast. Another island in the same area, Matsu, was also attacked. These two islands have always been a part of free China-never under Communist control. 
This bombardment of Quemoy has been going on almost continuously ever since. Also Chinese Communists have been using their naval craft to try to break up the supplying of Quemoy, with its 125,000 people. Their normal source of supply is by sea from Formosa, where the government of free China is now located. 
Chinese Communists say that they will capture Quemoy. So far they have not actually attempted a landing, but their bombardment has caused great damage. Over 1,000 people have been killed or wounded. In large part these are civilians. 
This is a tragic affair. It is shocking that in this day and age naked force should be used for such aggressive purposes. 
But this is not the first time that the Chinese Communists have acted in this way. 
In 1950 they attacked and tried to conquer the Republic of Korea. At that time President Truman announced the intention of protecting Formosa, the principal area still held by free China, because of the belief that Formosa's safety was vital to the security of the United States and the free world. Our government has adhered firmly ever since 1950 to that policy. 
In 1953 and 1954 the Chinese Communists took an active part in the war in Indo-China against Viet Nam. 
In the fall of 1954 they attacked Quemoy and Matsu, the same two islands they are attacking now. They broke off that attack when, in January 1955, the Congress and I agreed that we should firmly support free China. 
Since then, for about four years, Chinese Communists have not used force for aggressive purposes. We have achieved an armistice in Korea which stopped the fighting there in 1953. There is a 1954 armistice in Viet Nam; and since 1955 there has been quiet in the Formosa Straits area. We had hoped that the Chinese Communists were becoming peaceful--but it seems not. 
So the world is again faced with the problem of armed aggression. Powerful dictatorships are attacking an exposed, but free, area. What should we do? 
Shall we take the position that, submitting to threat, it is better to surrender pieces of free territory in the hope that this will satisfy the appetite of the aggressor and we shall have peace? 
Do we not still remember that the name of "Munich" symbolizes a vain hope of appeasing dictators? 
At that time, the policy of appeasement was tried and it failed. Prior to the second World War, Mussolini seized Ethiopia. In the far East, Japanese warlords were grabbing Manchuria by force. Hitler sent his armed forces into the Rhineland in violation of the Versailles Treaty. Then he annexed little Austria. When he got away with that, he next turned to Czechoslovakia and began taking it, bit by bit. 
In the face of all these attacks on freedom by the dictators, the powerful democracies stood aside. It seemed that Ethiopia and Manchuria were too far away and too unimportant to fight about. In Europe, appeasement was looked upon as the way to peace. The democracies felt that if they tried to stop what was going on, that would mean war. But because of these repeated retreats, war came just the same. 
If the democracies had stood firm at the beginning, almost surely there would have been no World War. Instead they gave such an appearance of weakness and timidity that aggressive rulers were encouraged to over-run one country after another. In the end the democracies saw that their very survival was at stake. They had no alternative but to turn and fight in what proved to be the most terrible war that the world has ever known. 
I know something about that war, and I never want to see that history repeated. But, my fellow Americans, it certainly can be repeated if the peace-loving democratic nations again fearfully practice a policy of standing idly by while big aggressors use armed force to conquer the small and weak. 
Let us suppose that the Chinese Communists conquer Quemoy. Would that be the end of the story? We know that it would not be the end of the story. History teaches that when powerful despots can gain something through aggression, they try, by the same methods, to gain more and more and more. 
Also, we have more to guide us than the teachings of history. We have the statements, the boastings, of the Chinese Communists themselves. They frankly say that their present military effort is part of a program to conquer Formosa. 
It is as certain as can be that the shooting which the Chinese Communists started on August 23rd had as its purpose not just the taking of the island of Quemoy. It is part of what is indeed an ambitious plan of armed conquest. 
This plan would liquidate all of the free world positions in the Western Pacific area and bring them under captive governments which would be hostile to the United States and the free world. Thus the Chinese and Russian Communists would come to dominate at least the Western half of the now friendly Pacific Ocean. 
So, aggression by ruthless despots again imposes a clear danger to the United States and to the free world. 
In this effort the Chinese Communists and the Soviet Union appear to be working hand in hand. Last Monday I received a long letter on this subject from Prime Minister Khrushchev. He warned the United States against helping its allies in the Western Pacific. He said that we should not support the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea. He contended that we should desert them, return all of our naval forces to our home bases, and leave our friends in the far East to face, alone, the combined military power of the Soviet Union and Communist China. Does Mr. Khrushchev think that we have so soon forgotten Korea? I must say to you very frankly and soberly, my friends, the United States cannotaccept the result that the Communists seek. Neither can we show, now, a weakness of purpose--a timidity--which would surely lead them to move more aggressively against us and our friends in the Western Pacific area. 
If the Chinese Communists have decided to risk a war, it is not because Quemoy itself is so valuable to them. They have been getting along without Quemoy ever since they seized the China mainland nine years ago. 
If they have now decided to risk a war, it can only be because they, and their Soviet allies, have decided to find out whether threatening war is a policy from which they can make big gains. 
If that is their decision, then a Western Pacific Munich would not buy us peace or security. It would encourage the aggressors. It would dismay our friends and allies there. If history teaches anything, appeasement would make it more likely that we would have to fight a major war. 
Congress has made clear its recognition that the security of the Western Pacific is vital to the security of the United States and that we should be firm. The Senate has ratified, by overwhelming vote, security treaties with the Republic of China covering Formosa and the Pescadores, and also the Republic of Korea. We have a mutual security treaty with the Republic of the Philippines, which could be next in line for conquest if Formosa fell into hostile hands. These treaties commit the United States to the defense of the treaty areas. In addition, there is a Joint Resolution which the Congress passed in January 1955 dealing specifically with Formosa and the offshore islands of Free China in the Formosa Straits. At that time the situation was similar to what it is today. Congress then voted the President authority to employ the armed forces of the United States for the defense not only of Formosa but of related positions such as Quemoy and Matsu, if I believed their defense to be appropriate in assuring the defense of Formosa. 
I might add that the mandate from the Congress was given by an almost unanimous bipartisan vote. 
Today, the Chinese Communists announce, repeatedly and officially, that their military operations against Quemoy are preliminary to attack on Formosa. So it is dear that the Formosa Straits Resolution of 1955 applies to the present situation. 
If the present bombardment and harassment of Quemoy should be converted into a major assault, with which the local defenders could not cope, then we would be compelled to face precisely the situation that Congress visualized in 1955. 
I have repeatedly sought to make clear our position in this matter so that there would not be danger of Communist miscalculation. The Secretary of State on September fourth made a statement to the same end. This statement could not, of course, cover every contingency. Indeed, I interpret the Joint Resolution as requiring me not to make absolute advance commitments, but to use my judgment according to the circumstances of the time. But the statement did carry a clear meaning to the Chinese Communists and to the Soviet Union. There will be no retreat in the face of armed aggression, which is part and parcel of a continuing program of using armed force to conquer new regions. 
I do not believe that the United States can be either lured or frightened into appeasement. I believe that in taking the position of opposing aggression by force, I am taking the only position which is consistent with the vitalinterests of the United States, and, indeed with the peace of the world. 
Some misguided persons have said that Quemoy is nothing to become excited about. They said the same about South Korea--about Viet Nam, about Lebanon. 
Now I assure you that no American boy will be asked by me to fight just for Quemoy. But those who make up our armed forces--and I believe the American people as a whole--do stand ready to defend the principle that armed force shall not be used for aggressive purposes. 
Upon observance of that principle depends a lasting and just peace. It is that same principle that protects the Western Pacific free world positions as wall as the security of our homeland. If we are not ready to defend this principle, then indeed tragedy after tragedy would befall us. 
But there is a far better way than resort to force to settle these differences, and there is some hope that such a better way may be followed. That is the way of negotiation. 
That way is open and prepared because in 1955 arrangements were made between the United States and the Chinese Communists that an Ambassador on each side would be authorized to discuss at Geneva certain problems of common concern. These included the matter of release of American civilians imprisoned in Communist China, and such questions as the renunciation of force in the Formosa area. There have been
73 meetings since August 1955. 
When our Ambassador, who was conducting these negotiations, was recently transferred to another post, we named as successor Mr. Beam, our Ambassador to Poland. The Chinese Communists were notified accordingly the latter part of July, but there was no response. 
The Secretary of State, in his September fourth statement, referred to these Geneva negotiations. Two days later, Mr. Chou En-lai, the Premier of the Peoples' Republic of China, proposed that these talks should be resumed "in the interests of peace." This was followed up on September eighth by Mr. Mao Tse-tung, the Chairman of the Peoples' Republic of China. We promptly welcomed this prospect and instructed our Ambassador at Warsaw to be ready immediately to resume these talks. We expect that the talks will begin upon the return to Warsaw of the Chinese Communist Ambassador who has been in Peiping. 
Perhaps our suggestion may be bearing fruit. We devoutly hope so. Naturally, the United States will adhere to the position it first took in 1955, that we will not in these talks be a party to any arrangements which would prejudice rights of our ally, the Republic of China. 
We know by hard experiences that the Chinese Communist leaders are indeed militant and aggressive. But we cannot believe that they would now persist in a course of military aggression which would threaten world peace, with all that would be involved. We believe that diplomacy can and should find a way out. There are measures that can be taken to assure that these offshore islands will not be a thorn in the side of peace. We believe that arrangements are urgently required to stop gun fire and to pave the way to a peaceful solution. 
If the bilateral talks between Ambassadors do not fully succeed, there is still the hope that the United Nations could exert a peaceful influence on the situation. 
In 1955 the hostilities of the Chinese Communists in the Formosa area were brought before the United Nations Security Council. But the Chinese Communists rejected its jurisdiction. They said that they were entitled to formosa and the offshore islands and that if they used armed force to get them, that was purely a "civil war," and that the United Nations had no right to concern itself. 
They claimed also that the attack by the Communist North Koreans on South Korea was "civil war," and that the United Nations, and the United States, were "aggressors" because they helped South Korea. They said the same about their attack on Viet Nam. 
I feel sure that these pretexts will never deceive or control world opinion. The fact is that Communist Chinese hostilities in the formosa Straits area do endanger world peace. I do not believe that any rulers, however aggressive they may be, will flout efforts to. find a peaceful and honorable solution, whether it be by direct negotiations or through the United Nations. 
My friends, we are confronted with a serious situation. But it is typical of the security problems of the world today. Powerful and aggressive forces are constantly probing, now here, now there, to see whether the free world is weakening. In the face of this, there are no easy choices available. It is misleading for anyone to imply that there are. 
However, the present situation, though serious, is by no means desperate or hopeless.
There is not going to be any appeasement.
I believe that there is not going to be any war. 
But there must be sober realization by the American people that our legitimate purposes are again being tested by those who threaten peace and freedom everywhere. 
This has not been the first test for us and for the free world. Probably it will not be the last. But as we meet each test with courage and unity, we contribute to the safety and the honor of our beloved land--and to the cause of a just and lasting peace. 




274 - The President's News Conference
October 1, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well no, I wouldn't see that in it at all. 
Let's go back to the language of the Formosan Resolution, which was carefully debated, thoroughly debated, and almost unanimously voted. It says that other areas than the formosa and Pescadores region will have to be considered by the President in any specific incident, as to the effect of attack upon them, upon Formosa, whether they are part and parcel of an attack on the major position or whether they are merely an effort to capture these islands so close to the mainland. 
Now, the best evidence on this particular issue, as of now, is that the Communists themselves, while calling it a civil war, have stated that their effort is not confined by any manner or means to Quemoy and Matsu, and not only to formosa but to driving the United States forces out of the Western Pacific. 
I should say an extra word there about their civil war: if it is a civil war, why is Russia already saying, through Mr. Khrushchev in his letters, that they are ready to participate in this war? If that is a civil war I am quite ignorant as to what the term really means. 
So I do not believe, Mr. Wilson, that there is anything of appeasement. I do believe this: we want a peaceful solution, and fundamentally anyone can see that the two islands as of themselves, as two pieces of territory, are not greatly vital to formosa. But of course the Chinese Nationalists hold that if you give way to that, you have given away to exposing us to attack, and that is a different thing from just Concluding that two pieces of territory are the vital issue. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, so far as I am concerned, and this particular question hasn't come up between the Secretary of State and me for some time, I have announced myself publicly before you people and others that there are certain historical facts in the history of Communist China that make it impossible for us to consider this question as an arguable one at this moment. 
For example, they are still branded as aggressors in Korea, and they have taken no effective steps to remove that stigma from the record. 
They have gone into Viet-Nam. They have still violated some of the terms of that armistice by continuing to train North Vietnamese and so on for armed purposes, and we don't know whether it's for eventual aggression or not. 
They have refused in spite of an agreement given as long back--don't hold me to memory, but I think 2 years ago--that they would release our remaining prisoners from China. They have refused to do so. 
And I think, personally, that that one thing is a sentimental, emotional thing in this United States that I well understand and share the feeling. And finally, their deportment in the diplomatic field all the way through has been such that makes this indeed a very difficult thing even to study dispassionately and disinterestedly. 
Now, when these things are done, possibly we have got a different problem, but the problem as of now, I think, is pretty clean-cut



288 - The President's News Conference
October 15, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't want to comment on that at all because I don't see very much use in such an idea



293 - Televised Panel Discussion With a Group of Republican Women, San Francisco, California.
October 21, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. I should say, first of all, we ought to get our understanding of this clear as to the facts. The Formosa Resolution that was passed in 1955 requires the President to assist for the defense of Formosa; but other areas--like outlying areas, Quemoy and Matsu, and so on-he must decide whether or not any attack upon them is merely a part of an attack on Formosa. And he has no authority or no responsibility for defending the islands as such. 
Now we should be perfectly clear in our minds: we are not concerned about two little bits of real estate in the world. Of course we are not. 
But I know of only one way for freedom to defend itself against the inroads or the threats of communist dictatorship, and that way is to stand by principle. 
Now we have stated and I have heard the foreign Minister and the Prime Minister of Britain state, and others from the free world, this particular, specific principle: we will notpermit communist territorial expansion by force. 
And the day we desert that principle, where do you go next? We say we are not concerned in these two islands, and why should we be concerned in formosa, why should we be concerned about the Philippines or any place else? When you stand on principle, you have got a definite place to stand. And I think we should be firm and strong, standing on that principle. But I add this: the United States should and always does extend a hand of friendship gladly, as long as it will be received sincerely by the individual nations that they are meeting. 
So any possibility of reaching that kind of a meeting of minds with the communists would certainly bring about negotiation, conciliation that would settle this problem in some way--I don't know exactly what the solution would be, but you can settle it. 
I merely repeat, then: we stand on principle, but seeking always for a peaceful solution



296 - Radio and Television Address Delivered at the "Fight-to-Win" Dinner Rally in the Stockyards Arena, Chicago, Illinois.
October 22, 1958

Again--in the Formosa Straits, America has shown that it will not countenance territorial expansion by Communist force. 
The shelling of Quemoy is not a struggle, in itself; it is the announced first step in the deliberate plan of the Chinese Communists to occupy formosa; this plan publicized by themselves. 
Territorially the off-shore islands of Quemoy and Matsu are inconsequential. But the principle they represent is great indeed. 
If we should quail before any Communist threat, if we allow Communist territorial expansion by force, our problems will certainly multiply, and not diminish.
If America did not know this before Korea, unquestionably it does now. 
But, would-be aggressors are on notice that we are always ready to negotiate in good faith, and never ready to appease



302 - Remarks at a Republican Rally at the Kanawha County Airport, Charleston, W. Va.
October 27, 1958

Just this morning I had some news that I think all of you would like to hear: the Chinese communists announced this morning that they have completely evacuated North Korea with their forces. 
This seemingly ends this particular episode, this particular difficulty between the Chinese communists and ourselves in North Korea. And I say "seemingly," because we must be alert, we must be wary, and we must be sure that by their deeds we will give our confidence to people whose word has no longer been such as to inspire our confidence



303 - Radio and Television Address Delivered at a Rally in the Syria Mosque, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
October 27, 1958

And now I have just a moment, I think, to bring to you a piece of news that you may not have heard: this morning, the Chinese communists announced that they have taken the last of their troops out of North Korea



310 - The President's News Conference
November 5, 1958

Well, now, you see there is something always changing in this problem. As far as I am concerned, our position has not changed as long as Red China continues to do some of the things which we cannot possibly stomach, one of them being that after 2 years ago promising to give back all our prisoners, and people that we think are illegally held, they still will do nothing about it. And there are a good many other accusations of the same kind


















