MID 234701, US v Nicaragua, 31 dec 1982 to 30-Jan-83 to 6-Jun-85



Question-and-Answer Session With High School Students on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
January 21, 1983

We are aiding in the sense of having military advisers to help their military or bring it up to the standard that is needed. But the guerrilla bands that are staging the revolution are funded, supported by, and armed by the Communist forces in the world. Many of the weapons that are brought in by way of Nicaragua, which has become that same kind of foothold, are American weapons that we abandoned in Vietnam


Remarks at the Annual Washington Conference of the American Legion 
February 22, 1983

But economic reform needs time to work, and democracy must be nurtured in countries where it doesn't have long traditions. We must ensure that the governments of El Salvador and other Central American countries can defend themselves against the Marxist guerrillas and [who] receive guns, training, and money through Cuba and Nicaragua. The United States cannot and will notallow Marxist terrorism and subversion to prevail in Central America


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Members of the Commonwealth Club of California in San Francisco 
March 4, 1983

The President. I can give you assurances. And there is no parallel whatsoever with Vietnam. We have the instance here of a government, duly elected. And just a short time ago—an election—the people of El Salvador proved their desire for order in their country, and democracy, and that they had no sympathy whatsoever for the rebels who are armed, who are trained by countries such as Cuba and others of the Iron Curtain countries. They're supplied with weapons that come in by way of Nicaragua. 
The threat is more to the entire Western Hemisphere and toward the area than it is to one country. If they get a foothold, and with Nicaragua already there, and El Salvador should fall as a result of this armed violence on the part of the guerrillas, I think Costa Rica, Honduras, Panama, all of these would follow. And I ask anyone—50 percent of everything that we have to import comes through the Caribbean, through the Panama Canal. It is vital to us that democracy be allowed to succeed in these countries, as I say it did in that last election


Remarks on Central America and El Salvador at the Annual Meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers 
March 10, 1983

The problem is that an aggressive minority has thrown in its lot with the Communists, looking to the Soviets and their own Cuban henchmen to help them pursue political change through violence. Nicaragua, right here, has become their base. And these extremists make no secret of their goal. They preach the doctrine of a "revolution without frontiers." Their first target is El Salvador. 
Important? Well, to begin with, there's the sheer human tragedy. Thousands of people have already died and, unless the conflict is ended democratically, millions more could be affected throughout the hemisphere. The people of El Salvador have proved they want democracy. But if guerrilla violence succeeds, they won't get it. El Salvador will join Cuba and Nicaragua as a base for spreading fresh violence to Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica—probably the most democratic country in the world today. The killing will increase and so will the threat to Panama, the canal and, ultimately, Mexico. In the process, vast numbers of men, women, and children will lose their homes, their countries, and their lives. 
I know a good many people wonder why we should care about whether Communist governments come into power in Nicaragua, El Salvador, or other such countries as Costa Rica and Honduras, Guatemala, and the islands of the Caribbean. One columnist argued last week that we shouldn't care, because their products are not that vital to our economy. That's like the argument of another so-called expert that we shouldn't worry about Castro's control over the island of Grenada—their only important product is nutmeg
These objectives are not easy to obtain. We're on theright track. Costa Rica continues to set a democratic example, even in the midst of economic crises and Nicaraguan intimidation. Honduras has gone from military rule to a freely elected civilian government. Despite incredible obstacles, the democratic center is holding in El Salvador, implementing land reform and working to replace the politics of death with a life of democracy

Part of the trouble is internal to El Salvador, but an important part is external—the availability of training, tactical guidance, and military supplies coming into El Salvador from Marxist Nicaragua. I'm sure you've read about the guerrillas capturing rifles from government national guard units. And recently, this has happened. But much more critical to guerrilla operations are the supplies and munitions that are infiltrated into El Salvador by land, sea, and air—by pack mules, by small boats, and by small aircraft


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
March 11, 1983

And I hope that it'll be a short time. I hope that these appeals and offers of amnesty will bring some of those people down from the hills. But I also have to recognize-not be naive—that these people up there in the hills are not just discontented peasants who have managed to get their hands on a military weapon. These are trained and highly equipped military forces—trained and equipped and backed by outsiders by way, mainly, of Cuba, through Nicaragua


Address to the Nation on Defense and National Security 
March 23, 1983

This third photo, which is the only one in this series that has been previously made public, shows Soviet military hardware that has made its way to Central America. This airfield with its MI-8 helicopters, anti-aircraft guns, and protected fighter sites is one of a number of military facilities in Nicaragua which has received Soviet equipment funneled through Cuba, and reflects the massive military buildup going on in that country. 
The Soviet-Cuban militarization of Grenada, in short, can only be seen as power projection into the region. And it is in this important economic and strategic area that we're trying to help the Governments of El Salvador, Costa Rica, Honduras, and others in their struggles for democracy against guerrillas supported through Cuba and Nicaragua


Question-and-Answer Session With High School Students on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
March 25, 1983

The guerrillas are not a group of peasants who just have taken their muskets in hand and wanted to stage a revolution because the government was tyrannical. They are trained military personnel, armed by way of the Soviet Union and Cuba, through Nicaragua, which has become a Communist base in this country, by its own admission. One of the leaders of the guerrilla fighters the other day publicly stated, yes, they were a friend of the Soviet Union; yes, they intended to bring communism to the Western hemisphere


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
March 29, 1983

The President. Well, I think this is something—intelligence matters and covert or overt activity, whatever, are things that are never discussed, and I'm not going to discuss them now. But we have tried to get along with the Government of Nicaragua and tried from the first. As a matter of fact, they had in these efforts some time ago, when the new revolutionary government was installed, they made pledges to us that they would not involve themselves in El Salvador. And we found them in direct violation of that which they could not deny-that they were arming the guerrillas in El Salvador. 
Now, what we're seeing in Nicaragua is the fact that it was a revolution by a coalition of groups that were all opposed to the dictatorial Somoza rule. And as happens so often in that kind of a coalition, when the revolution was over, one faction—and it turned out to be the extreme leftist faction-simply took control and ousted the other revolutionary partners and created a Marxist-Leninist government, openly acknowledging their ties to Cuba and the Soviet Union, openly arming and providing weapons and supplies and training to the guerrillas in El Salvador. And what we're seeing now are the other revolutionary factions-totally ousted from any participation in the government—now fighting back on that



Radio Address to the Nation on the Observance of Easter and Passover 
April 2, 1983

In Central America Communist-inspired revolution still spreads terror and instability, but it's no match for the much greater force of faith that runs so deep among the people. We saw this during Pope John Paul II's recent visit there. As he conducted a Mass in Nicaragua, state police jeered and led organized heckling by Sandinista supporters. But the Pope lifted a crucifix above his head and waved it at the crowd before him, then turned and symbolically held it up before the massive painting of Sandinista soldiers that loomed behind. The symbol of good prevailed. In contrast, everywhere else the Holy Father went in the region, spreading a message that only love can build, he was met by throngs of enthusiastic believers, eager for Papal guidance and blessing.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
April 14, 1983

The President. I am not going to get—I could not and would not possibly talk about such things. But may I point out that this whole controversy over Nicaragua is ignoring some realities, that the Nicaraguan Government is a revolutionary government that took power by force, but with the promise of democratic elections, none of which have taken place. And all of this was under the previous administration. The previous administration, however, did recognize this government of Nicaragua, sought to help it with considerable financial aid, and withdrew that aid, long before we were here, when it became apparent that the government had become completely Marxist, had turned away and thrown out some of the democratic groups that had supported them and fought with them in the revolution to bring democracy to Nicaragua and were, then, no longer a part of the government. 
But also the cutoff of funds was because the Nicaraguan Government had pledged to the United States that it would not attempt to overthrow any other governments in Central America, particularly El Salvador, by helping the insurgents there, the guerrillas, and they violated that promise. And they are still violating it. 
And anything that we're doing in that area is simply trying to interdict the supply lines which are supplying the guerrillas in El Salvador. But the picture today is that Nicaragua, with its protests that somehow someone is trying to overthrow them, it, as a revolutionary government, is trying to overthrow the government of a neighboring country, El Salvador, which was a duly elected government and which is going to hold another election before this year is out
The President. We are not doing anything to try and overthrow the Nicaraguan Government. As a matter of fact, let's put that in perspective for a moment. 
Nicaragua today has created the biggest military force in all of Central America and large parts of South America—an army of some 25,000, backed by a militia of 50,000, armed with Soviet weapons that consist of heavy-duty tanks, an air force, helicopter gunships, fighter planes, bombers, and so forth, heavy artillery. And a few thousand Miskito Indians and guerrillas—I don't think it's reasonable to assume that that kind of a force could nurse any ambitions that they can overthrow that government with that great military force. And I think that people should understand some of these things and ask themselves what is the need for them having the biggest army in all of the region. 
There are—we are cooperating with the other Central American countries in the region to try and bring democracy and peace to Central America. 
The President. Well, no, I think—I'm not going to answer a hypothetical question with a hypothetical answer. And I only know that that possibility does exist, because the Soviet Union, by way of Cuba, has been engaged already. May I remind you that at the inauguration of the revolutionary government when it took over, Castro was present and a representative of the Soviet Union, and both of them openly hailed Nicaragua as the first Communist country on the mainland of the Western Hemisphere. 
The President. We, of course, as I said-anything that we're doing is aimed at interdicting these supply lines and stopping this effort to overthrow the El Salvador Government. But what I might personally wish or what our government might wish still would not justify us violating the law of the land. 
The President. No, because that would be violating the law. 

Interview With USA Today 
April 26, 1983
The President. Well, no, what I think I will point out is that the difference between El Salvador and Nicaragua is that Nicaragua is a revolutionary government that by force took over the governing of Nicaragua. But then you had the internal fight in which many of the revolutionaries were east aside, and the promises that had been made as being the goals of the revolution were never carried out. 
Our country had tried to do—been trying to get along, negotiate with Nicaragua. But our interest there is because the arms and the training and even the direction of guerrilla military movements are all centered in Nicaragua. The arms are coming into El Salvador by way of Nicaragua. We know that the operations of the Salvadoran guerrillas are directed by radio from the capital of—near the capital of Nicaragua. 
The President. Well, as I say, we're interested in making it more difficult—in fact, impossible for Nicaragua to continue to arm the guerrillas in El Salvador


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on Central America 
April 27, 1983

But in spite of, or maybe because of, a flurry of stories about places like Nicaragua and El Salvador and, yes, some concerted propaganda, many of us find it hard to believe we have a stake in problems involving those countries. Too many have thought of Central America as just that place way down below Mexico that can't possibly constitute a threat to our well-being. And that's why I've asked for this session. Central America's problems do directly affect the security and the well-being of our own people. And Central America is much closer to the United States than many of the world troublespots that concern us. So, we work to restore our own economy; we cannot afford to lose sight of our neighbors to the south. 
El Salvador is nearer to Texas than Texas is to Massachusetts. Nicaragua is just as close to Miami, San Antonio, San Diego, and Tucson as those cities are to Washington, where we're gathered tonight. 
Because of its importance, the Caribbean Basin is a magnet for adventurism. We're all aware of the Libyan cargo planes refueling in Brazil a few days ago on their way to deliver "medical supplies" to Nicaragua. Brazilian authorities discovered the so-called medical supplies were actually munitions and prevented their delivery
The guerrillas are not embattled peasants, armed with muskets. They're professionals, sometimes with better training and weaponry than the government's soldiers. The Salvadoran battalions that have received U.S. training have been conducting themselves well on the battlefield and with the civilian population. But so far, we've only provided enough money to train one Salvadoran soldier out of ten, fewer than the number of guerrillas that are trained by Nicaragua and Cuba. 
And let me set the record straight on Nicaragua, a country next to El Salvador. In 1979 when the new government took over in Nicaragua, after a revolution which overthrew the authoritarian rule of Somoza, everyone hoped for the growth of democracy. We in the United States did, too. By January of 1981, our emergency relief and recovery aid to Nicaragua totalled $118 million-more than provided by any other developed country. In fact, in the first 2 years of Sandinista rule, the United States directly or indirectly sent five times more aid to Nicaragua than it had in the 2 years prior to the revolution. Can anyone doubt the generosity and the good faith of the American people? 
These were hardly the actions of a nation implacably hostile to Nicaragua. Yet, the Government of Nicaragua has treated us as an enemy. It has rejected our repeated peace efforts. It has broken its promises to us, to the Organization of American States and, most important of all, to the people of Nicaragua. 
No sooner was victory achieved than a small clique ousted others who had been part of the revolution from having any voice in the government. Humberto Ortega, the Minister of Defense, declared Marxism-Leninism would be their guide, and so it is. 
The Government of Nicaragua has imposed a new dictatorship. It has refused to hold the elections it promised. It has seized control of most media and subjects all media to heavy prior censorship. It denied the bishops and priests of the Roman Catholic Church theright to say Mass on radio during Holy Week. It insulted and mocked the Pope. It has driven the Miskito Indians from their homelands, burning their villages, destroying their crops, and forcing them into involuntary internment camps far from home. It has moved against the private sector and free labor unions. It condoned mob action against Nicaragua's independent human rights commission and drove the director of that commission into exile. 
In short, after all these acts of repression by the government, is it any wonder that opposition has formed? Contrary to propaganda, the opponents of the Sandinistas are not diehard supporters of the previous Somoza regime. In fact, many are anti-Somoza heroes and fought beside the Sandinistas to bring down the Somoza government. Now they've been denied any part in the new government because they truly wanted democracy for Nicaragua and they still do. Others are Miskito Indians fighting for their homes, their lands, and their lives. 
The Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua turned out to be just an exchange of one set of autocratic rulers for another, and the people still have no freedom, no democratic rights, and more poverty. Even worse than its predecessor, it is helping Cuba and the Soviets to destabilize our hemisphere. 
Meanwhile, the Government of El Salvador, making every effort to guarantee democracy, free labor unions, freedom of religion, and a free press, is under attack by guerrillas dedicated to the same philosophy that prevails in Nicaragua, Cuba, and, yes, the Soviet Union. Violence has been Nicaragua's most important export to the world. It is the ultimate in hypocrisy for the unelected Nicaraguan Government to charge that we seek their overthrow, when they're doing everything they can to bring down the elected Government of El Salvador. [Applause] Thank you. The guerrilla attacks are directed from a headquarters in Managua, the capital of Nicaragua. 
But let us be clear as to the American attitude toward the Government of Nicaragua. We do not seek its overthrow. Our interest is to ensure that it does not infect its neighbors through the export of subversion and violence. Our purpose, in conformity with American and international law, is to prevent the flow of arms to El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, and Costa Rica. We have attempted to have a dialog with the Government of Nicaragua, but it persists in its efforts to spread violence. 
We should not, and we will not, protect the Nicaraguan Government from the anger of its own people. But we should, through diplomacy, offer an alternative. And as Nicaragua ponders its options, we can and will—with all the resources of diplomacy-protect each country of Central America from the danger of war. 
Even Costa Rica, Central America's oldest and strongest democracy—a government so peaceful it doesn't even have an army—is the object of bullying and threats from Nicaragua's dictators. 
Nicaragua's neighbors know that Sandinista promises of peace, nonalliance, and nonintervention have not been kept. Some 36 new military bases have been built. There were only 13 during the Somoza years. Nicaragua's new army numbers 25,000 men, supported by a militia of 50,000. It is the largest army in Central America, supplemented by 2,000 Cuban military and security advisers. It is equipped with the most modern weapons-dozens of Soviet-made tanks, 800 Sovietbloc trucks, Soviet 152-millimeter howitzers, 100 anti-aircraft guns, plus planes and helicopters. There are additional thousands of civilian advisers from Cuba, the Soviet Union, East Germany, Libya, and the PLO. And we're attacked because we have 55 military trainers in El Salvador. 
The goal of the professional guerrilla movements in Central America is as simple as it is sinister: to destabilize the entire region from the Panama Canal to Mexico. And if you doubt beyond this point, just consider what Cayetano Carpio, the now-deceased Salvadoran guerrilla leader, said earlier this month. Carpio said that after El Salvador falls, El Salvador and Nicaragua would be "arm-in-arm and struggling for the total liberation of Central America." 
Nicaragua's dictatorial junta, who themselves made war and won power operating from bases in Honduras and Costa Rica, like to pretend that they are today being attacked by forces based in Honduras. The fact is, it is Nicaragua's government that threatens Honduras, not the reverse. It is Nicaragua who has moved heavy tanks close to the border, and Nicaragua who speaks of war. It was Nicaraguan radio that announced on April 8th the creation of a new, unified, revolutionary coordinating board to push forward the Marxist struggle in Honduras. 
Nicaragua, supported by weapons and military resources provided by the Communist bloc, represses its own people, refuses to make peace, and sponsors a guerrilla war against El Salvador
Only last week, an official of the Soviet Union reiterated Brezhnev's threat to station nuclear missiles in this hemisphere, 5 minutes from the United States. Like an echo, Nicaragua's Commandante Daniel Ortega confirmed that, if asked, his country would consider accepting those missiles. I understand that today they may be having second thoughts.

First, in response to decades of inequity and indifference, we will support democracy, reform, and human freedom. This means using our assistance, our powers of persuasion, and our legitimate leverage to bolster humane democratic systems where they already exist and to help countries on their way to that goal complete the process as quickly as human institutions can be changed. Elections in El Salvador and also in Nicaragua must be open to all, fair and safe. The international community must help. We will work at human rights problems, not walkaway from them. 
And, third, in response to the military challenge from Cuba and Nicaragua—to their deliberate use of force to spread tyranny-we will support the security of the region's threatened nations. We do not view security assistance as an end in itself, but as a shield for democratization, economic development, and diplomacy. No amount of reform will bring peace so long as guerrillas believe they will win by force. No amount of economic help will suffice if guerrilla units can destroy roads and bridges and power stations and crops, again and again, with impunity. But with better training and material help, our neighbors can hold off the guerrillas and give democratic reform time to take root.


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
May 4, 1983

The thing that needs telling about this whole situation in Nicaragua—I thought I had covered this subject, but maybe I didn't cover it enough the other night—and that is that, right now, these forces that have risen up in opposition to the Sandinista government are under what you might say is a sort of a group, a controlling body that formed in the northern part of Nicaragua. There are about seven leading members to this kind of committee. Most of them were former anti-Somoza people. They are people who simply want this Government of Nicaragua to keep its promises. 
If you remember, the Organization of American States asked Somoza to resign at that time. And Somoza, his reply to them was that if it would benefit his country, Nicaragua, he would. And he did resign. The Organization of American States also gave four points to the Sandinistas that they, the Organization of American States, would support them if their goal was these four things: of promoting democracy, of immediate elections, of a concern for human rights. And the Sandinistas acceded to that and said yes, those were their goals, and they would keep those four provisions or promises. And they haven't. They never made an effort to keep them. They violated all of them. 
Now, this is what makes me say that there's a great hypocrisy there of the Sandinista government protesting what is happening in its own country and from people who were once part of its own revolution at the same time that they are supporting people in another country who are seeking to overthrow a duly elected government of the people. 
The President. Well, do they? Or are they asking that government—or that revolution of which they themselves were a part-asking it to go back to its revolutionary promises and keep faith with the revolution that the people of Nicaragua supported? 
Many of these people are businessmen whose businesses have been taken over. They are farmers whose land was seized by this government, farmers whose crops were—they were forced to sell them to the government at less than the cost of production. And they're protesting this violation of what had made them support the revolution to begin with. 
But the whole purpose of the Sandinista government seems to be not only with El Salvador but the export of revolution to their other neighbors, to countries that are already democracies. Honduras has taken that step; Costa Rica, the oldest democracy of all. And all of them are plagued by radicals in their midst who are encouraged by the Sandinista government. 
The President. Well, except that then the only help that you can give is through other governments, and I don't think that—that's an effective thing to do. And how do you know that the other governments would want to, themselves, then, participate in helping the people that need the help? In other words, we'd be asking some other government to do what our own Congress has said that we can't do.
The President. No, I Was saying that's what the committee said, that the committee said we would have to go overt, and, then, in going overt, you can only give money to another government. And, if you did that, then you would have to be depending on—well, maybe those other governments in Central America would give that money to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. 
Now, if they want to tell us that we can give money and do the same things we've been doing—money, giving, providing subsistence and so forth to these people directly and making it overt instead of covert-that's all right with me. I just don't want the restrictions put on it that they might put on. 
The President. Yes, but not if they do it as one individual or more than one, has suggested on the Hill—that they would do it, and then, we would have to enforce restrictions on the freedom fighters as to what tactics they could use. And I have said that if we were to do that, then I would expect that the only fair thing would be that the Nicaraguan Government would itself impose the same restrictions on the freedom fighter, in El Salvador—only I don't call them freedom fighters, because they've got freedom and they're fighting for something else. They're fighting for a restraint on freedom. 
The President. I just used the word, I guess, "freedom fighters," because the fact that we know that the thing that brought those people together is the desire, as I said, for the same revolutionary principles that they once fought and have been betrayed in. As I say, they've made it plain: They want what they once fought beside the Sandinistas to get. And they've been betrayed. And I thought that the use of freedom fighters was because—I found out that it seems as if there's a kind of a bias in the treatment of guerrilla fighters. It depends on what kind of a government they're opposing. And some are treated more kindly than others. 
Now, I think the ones in El Salvador who are fighting against an elected government, they're guerrillas. But in reality, when we talk about Nicaragua and everyone says, "the government in Nicaragua," well, it was a government out of the barrel of a gun. And, true, we favored it before I got here. We did not lift a hand for the existing government of Nicaragua, because we did not believe that it was treating its people fairly. And here was a revolution that took place that seemed to express all the things that we all believe in. 
Well now, they have not carried out those things. And they are there by force. And what really—other than being in control of the capital, you might say, and having a handle on all the levers—what makes them any more a legitimate government than the people of Nicaragua who are asking for a chance to vote for the kind of government they want?


Interview With Allan Dale of WOAI-Radio in San Antonio, Texas, on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
May 5, 1983

The President. Well, I didn't know that. And I'm glad to know that, because, you know, I'm asking for bipartisan support there in Congress in helping our friends in Central America develop their economies and democratic institutions, and protect themselves against the enemies of democracy and against aggression from Cuba and Nicaragua and, yes, the Soviet Union. Well, I'm glad to hear that. 
The President. I think they've been taken in by, maybe, some careless reporting, maybe by what's been quite a concerted propaganda campaign. But I can tell you that we have polls that show that an awful lot of people in the country just aren't quite sure, to tell you the truth, where Nicaragua and El Salvador are or which side we're on. They just don't have the information. And this is one of the reasons I went on the air with the speech the other night. And it did have some effect on them.


Remarks at Cinco de Mayo Ceremonies in San Antonio, Texas 
May 5, 1983

I think maybe some of you may have heard my speech before the Congress concerning Central America last week. I hope you agree with me—agree that the United States can no longer remain complacent about what's happening to our neighbors and to our friends to the south of us. We can no longer find excuses for doing nothing and then hope for the best, when the enemies of democracy—Cuba, the U.S.S.R., and Nicaragua—are actively working to subvert these nations. That's why I asked for bipartisan support in helping our Central American friends develop their economies and democratic institutions and protect themselves against aggression. What's going on in Central America relates directly to the security of the United States, and when it comes to that, we aren't Republicans and Democrats; we're Americans


Remarks at the Annual Members Banquet of the National Rifle Association in Phoenix, Arizona 
May 6, 1983

But El Salvador is under attack. Guerrillas with contempt for democracy and armed to the teeth by Nicaragua, Cuba, and the Soviets are determined to shoot their way into power. We have asked the Congress for a modest package of assistance for the region, with three times as much economic aid as military aid


The President's News Conference
May 17, 1983
The President. Why, because we want to keep on obeying the laws of our country, which we are obeying. [Laughter] 
The President. Well, Lou, let me answer it this way: We have tried to negotiate. We have tried to talk and to relate on a bilateral basis with the Nicaraguan Government, the Sandinista government. 
The only objection that we have to them is, they're not minding their own business. They are attempting to overthrow a duly elected government in a neighboring country. They are supplying direction. They are supplying training. They're supplying arms and everything else that is needed to guerrillas that are trying to overthrow that government. 
All we've said to Nicaragua, and from the beginning, is, "Become a legitimate American state. Quit trying to subvert your neighbors, and we'll talk all kinds of relationship with you." 
But here is a country, a government, that was not elected, that then threw out part of its own revolutionary forces because they wanted legitimate democracy, and yet at the same time that it's complaining because those same forces—those are not remnants of the Somoza government that they threw out of office; those are some of their former allies. And all they want from them is for that government to keep the promises it made to the Organization of American States, which were to have elections, to restore human rights, to observe all the democratic principles. 
The Miskito Indians are also fighting because they were chased out of their villages, their villages burned, their crops were destroyed or confiscated by this revolutionary government, and the Miskito Indians are fighting for their lives. But what we've said to them is, and will say again, if they'll just start minding their own business, they can get along with all the rest of us. 


Remarks at a Cuban Independence Day Celebration in Miami, Florida 
May 20, 1983

But we must realize that our friends cannot be expected to stand unarmed against insurgents who've been armed to the teeth by the Soviet-Cuban-Nicaraguan axis. Any excuse for not providing our friends the weapons they need to defend themselves is a prescription for disaster. And again, those who advocate ignoring the legitimate defense needs of those under attack will be held accountable if our national security is put in jeopardy


Interview With Foreign Television Journalists 
May 26, 1983

But what we are concerned about is the Soviet expansionism, and particularly when it comes into the Western Hemisphere. There have been several Soviet vessels, recently, unloading weaponry in Nicaragua and for the use in the effort to overthrow the Government of Salvador. We don't look upon those as friendly acts.

The President. Well, in this instance, pardon me, the reverse is true. There's no question, the past history of El Salvador has been a history of military dictatorships, as has been true in so many of our neighbors to the south, but this is a government, now, elected by the people. They had elections last year. More than 80 percent of the people turned out to vote, and they voted for peace. They voted for this government and an end to the guerrilla activity which is backed and sponsored by Cuba, by the Government of Nicaragua, and by the Soviet Union. 
The contrast is in Nicaragua, where a revolutionary government did overthrow a right-wing government. And our country—I wasn't here then, but my predecessor did not lift a finger to help that right-wing government; indeed, when the revolutionary government came into power, immediately offered financial and economic aid. But what happened in that revolution was-built, as it was, of a coalition of forces—they ousted the democratic forces. And the group that is in power now in Nicaragua is as totalitarian as any Communist country. And they are seeking—they are aiding the guerrillas that are trying to overthrow the democratic government of El Salvador. 
And the guerrillas that are fighting in Nicaragua are parts not of the government that was thrown out of power, they are formerly allies in the revolution who are seeking to restore the original goals of the revolution which were democracy, elections. Incidentally, El Salvador is going to have another election before this year is out to elect a President. So, we're not supporting right-wing governments.


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
May 27, 1983

The President. Yes, there must be the worry of that in our hemisphere here and the stepped-up aid. There has been as much aid by the Soviet Union, as much shipped into Nicaragua in these first 5 months as there was in the entire last year. And that has to be of concern to all of us


Remarks at a Dinner Honoring Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina 
June 16, 1983

You know, the other day the Soviet paper, Pravda, actually said something I support. It said that peace in Central America is possible only on the basis of respect for theright of each people to choose, itself, its way of life. Well, I would only add this: the two perfect places to begin are Cuba and Nicaragua, where free and democratic elections are notpermitted


Remarks of President Reagan and Provisional President Alvaro Alfredo Magana Borja of El Salvador Following Their Meetings 
June 17, 1983

Regionally, our talks focused on the threat posed by Nicaragua to other countries in Central America. We reviewed the status of the Contadora initiative and the efforts of democratic countries in the region to find a peaceful solution


Remarks at a Mississippi Republican Party Fund-raising Dinner in Jackson 
June 20, 1983

I appreciate the sincere motives of many who point to the faults of our friends and ask for reforms. I agree with those who insist on economic as well as military assistance. Nevertheless, there is no excuse for not providing those under attack the weapons they need to defend themselves. We must not listen to those who would disarm our friends and allow Central America to be turned into a string of anti-American Marxist dictatorships. The result could be a tidal wave of refugees. And this time, they'll be "feet people" and not "boat people" swarming into our country, seeking a safe haven from Communist repression to our south. We cannotpermit the Soviet-Cuban-Nicaraguan axis to take over Central America


The President's News Conference
June 28, 1983
And maybe we haven't done what we should have done in keeping the people informed of what is going on, because there—very definitely, there are thousands of Soviets and Cubans—well, Soviets in Cuba. There is a great number of them also in Nicaragua. There are thousands of Cubans, including one of their top generals, most experienced generals, in Nicaragua. 
On the other side in Nicaragua, it is simply reversed. It is the democratic revolutionaries who were ousted once the revolution was successful while the Marxists took over and created their totalitarian form of government. And all they want, all they're fighting for is to return to the principles of the revolution that overthrew Somoza—free elections, human rights, free press, all of those things
You know, it's a funny thing. There's 1,500 Cubans training in Nicaragua and there's 55 Americans in El Salvador, and all everyone seems to think is a sin is our 55.



Remarks at a California Republican Party Fund-raising Dinner in Long Beach 
June 30, 1983

Forty percent of all of our foreign trade and two-thirds of our petroleum imports pass through the Panama Canal and the sea-lanes of the Caribbean, where we see construction in Cuba of a naval base from which Soviet nuclear submarines can now operate, a Soviet capacity for air reconnaissance over our eastern coast from Cuban bases, the building of an enormous war machine in Nicaragua aided by thousands of Cuban military personnel, sophisticated weapons, including Soviet-made tanks and arms from Cuba, the Soviet Union, the Eastern bloc, Libya, and the PLO to name a few. 
And the Soviet-Cuban-Nicaraguan war machine is not being built to make Central America safe for democracy. It's not being built to pursue peace there or economic and social reform. It's being built to subvert the peace and impose communism by force, and not just in El Salvador or Nicaragua, but by their own boast, their open declaration, in all of Central America.
We must not turn our backs on our friends. We must notpermit dictators to ram communism down the throats of innocent people in one country after another. If we're to be successful in helping the forces for democracy, then we must have the full financial package that we requested. And if we don't get what we asked for, we can't do the job, and we leave the door open to more subversion. 
You know, the Soviet paper Pravda recently said something that I actually support. It said that peace in Central America is possible only on the basis of respect for theright of each people to choose itself its way of life. I would only add this: The two perfect places to begin are Cuba and Nicaragua, where free and democratic elections are notpermitted. 
To those dictators, we say, "Prove to the world that your system is legitimate. Prove you're not afraid of your own people. Let them vote. And while you're at it, put down your guns. Permit a free press. Stop harassing your priests. And then we'll see if they truly enjoy your repression and regimentation, or if they'd rather have a new life with dignity and opportunity and freedom



Remarks at the Quadrennial Convention of the International Longshoremen's Association in Hollywood, Florida 
July 18, 1983

In April 1 reported to the Congress that the problems in Central America have the potential to affect our national security. This is still the case, and I want to reinforce it. Many of our citizens don't fully understand the seriousness of the situation, so let me put it bluntly: There is a war in Central America that is being fueled by the Soviets and the Cubans. They are arming, training, supplying, and encouraging a war to subjugate another nation to communism, and that nation is El Salvador. The Soviets and the Cubans are operating from a base called Nicaragua. And this is the first real Communist aggression on the American mainland. And we must never forget that here in the Western Hemisphere we are Americans in every country from pole to pole. 
This Florida community where we meet today is closer to Nicaragua than it is to Washington, D.C. Two-thirds of our foreign trade and nearly half of our petroleum pass through the Caribbean. It's well to remember that in early 1942, a handful of Hitler's submarines sank more tonnage in that area than in all of the Atlantic Ocean, and they did this without a single naval base anywhere nearby. Today, Cuba is home to a Soviet combat brigade, a submarine base capable of servicing Soviet subs, and military air bases visited regularly by Soviet military aircraft that control our shores. If the Nazis during World War II and the Soviets today have recognized that the Caribbean and Central America is vital to our interests, don't you think it's about time that we recognize that, too? 
Costa Rica is as strong a democracy as you will find anywhere with a long history of peace, free elections, and stability. They don't even have an army. If democracy can work in Costa Rica and Honduras, if it can work in El Salvador and Nicaragua and Guatemala, there is still time for the people of Latin America to build a prosperous, peaceful, and free future. And we have an obligation to help them for our own sake as well as theirs. 
Since I spoke to the Congress in April, Cuba has sent one of its best known combat generals to Nicaragua. More Cuban soldiers and Soviet supplies have arrived in Nicaragua. This cannotbeallowed to continue. 
Tomorrow, July 19th, is the fourth anniversary of the Sandinista revolution. This was a revolution that promised to bring freedom to the Nicaraguan people. History will call it the revolution of broken promises. Tomorrow, the nine military commanders who rule Nicaragua with Cuban and Soviet power will indulge in boastful revolutionary rhetoric. But there are few left who will believe them. This consensus throughout the hemisphere is that while the Sandinistas promise their people freedom, all they've done is replace the former dictatorship with their own, a dictatorship of counterfeit revolutionaries who wear fatigues and drive around in Mercedes sedans and Soviet tanks and whose current promise is to spread their brand of revolution throughout Central America. 
What kind of freedom have the Sandinistas established? Just ask the 1,300 stevedores at the Nicaraguan port of Corinto. Last month, their union assembly was packed with Sandinistas, and six union leaders were arrested. Their presumed crime was trying to develop ties with independent trade unions, including some here affiliated with the AFL-CIO. I can tell you one thing, if all the longshoremen in Corinto are like Teddy Gleason, the Sandinistas have got a real fight on their hands. 
What kind of democracy is it? Ask the Nicaraguan refugees who've risked starvation and attack to escape to Honduras. Let me read to you directly from a newspaper article: "... one Nicaraguan man—still filthy, ragged and, above all, hungry after an odyssey that began 5 weeks ago-breathed a note of thanks: 'God has smiled on us.'" Imagine, with barely clothes on his back and nothing in his stomach, he believed that God had smiled on him because he'd arrived in free, democratic Honduras. 
This man fled Nicaragua in May with many others when they learned the Sandinistas planned to relocate their villages. Let me quote again what one of the many others—what they had learned and what they had to say. They said, "We left everything. We left the pigs, the corn, the animals .... This year they wouldn't let us plant, because they wanted us to move closer to the military bases, they wanted us to be in the militia, and we did not want to be executioners." 
Well, when the Sandinistas first took power, all their neighbors hoped that they would embrace democracy as they promised. In the first year and a half after the revolution, the United States sent $118 million worth of emergency relief and recovery aid to Nicaragua, more than provided by any other country in the world. But the Sandinistas had lied. They rejected their pledges to their own people, to the Organization of American States, and to the world. 
Let me say a few more words about those specific promises. The Sandinistas had promised the Organization of American States that they would hold elections and grant all human rights that go with a democracy. In short, they literally made a contract to establish a true democracy. The dictator Somoza was then persuaded by the OAS to resign and the government was turned over to the revolutionaries and recognized officially by the Organization of American States. 
So far so good. But then, one faction of the revolutionaries, backed by Cuba and the Soviet Union, seized total power and ousted their revolutionary comrades who had been fighting to establish a real democracy. Nicaragua today is a nation abusing its own people and its neighbors. The guerrilla bands fighting in Nicaragua are trying to restore the true revolution and keep the promises made to the OAS. Isn't it time that all of us in the Americas worked together to hold Nicaragua accountable for the promises made and broken 4 years ago? 
There's a vital link between what's happening in Nicaragua and what's happening in El Salvador. And the link is very simple: The dictators of Nicaragua are actively trying to destroy the budding democracy in neighboring El Salvador. 
This is El Salvador's revolution—it is one that is building democracy. Contrast this with the corrupted revolution in Nicaragua, one which has repressed human liberties, denied free unions and free elections, censored the press, and threatened its neighbors and violated a public pledge. 


Remarks at a Ceremony Marking the Annual Observance of Captive Nations Week 
July 19, 1983

We've seen construction in Cuba of a naval base from which Soviet nuclear submarines can operate. We see Soviet capacity for air reconnaissance over our eastern coast from Cuban bases. And we see the Soviets and Cuba building a war machine in Nicaragua that dwarfs the forces of all their neighbors combined. Let's not fool ourselves: This war machine isn't being built to make Central America safe for democracy. It isn't being built to pursue peace, economic or social reform. It's being built, by their own boast, to impose a revolution without frontiers


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
July 21, 1983

The President. No, we're conducting exercises such as we've conducted before here in this hemisphere. We've conducted them in other parts of the world, and there haven't been too many questions about that or suggesting that we're starting.— 
The President.—to try to start a war in those other areas. We conduct annual maneuvers more than once a year, as a matter of fact. 
The President. We're conducting exercises there. And I think that there's every reason for us to do so with the responsibility we have in this hemisphere.
The President. Well, you're getting very complicated there and getting me deep into the field of things that I don't think are at hand yet. I'd have no way of reading their minds as to why. I think it could be assumed that maybe what is happening there with the contras, who are opposing the Sandinista regime, have something to do with this decision. Undoubtedly Contadora did also have something to do with it. 
I welcome this first step. I don't think it's far enough. But what really is needed is what the contras are asking for, and that is that the Sandinista government is in violation, literally, of a contract that they made with the Organization of American States. That's not just the United States; that's 30 other American States. They made a contract during the revolution that, if they had the help of the OAS in persuading the Somoza regime to step down and let their revolution take over, they made specific promises as to what they would do with regard to freedom of press and freedom of—well, all the freedoms that we enjoy here in this country. They have violated all of those provisions. And the OAS considers that the violation of a contract. And what the contras are really seeking, having been members of the Sandinista revolution for the most part in its effort to bring democracy to Nicaragua, they are trying to restore the original purpose of the revolution. 
The President. Well, without even waiting for Nicaragua, we have proposed and the Salvadoran Government has proposed that if the guerrillas will lay down their arms and come in and participate in the democratic process of election, they will be granted amnesty. They have a peace commission that is organized to negotiate such a thing with them. And, so far, the guerrillas in El Salvador have refused any such meeting on that. 
The President. Well, if the Sandinista regime remained, but remained true to the original purpose of the revolution—this is a government by one faction of the original revolution. It exiled, it jailed, it threw out of office the other leaders of the revolution because they wanted democracy and the present group wanted Communist totalitarianism. And this is what they presently have there. So, what is being struggled for there is a restoration of the original revolution. 
The President. I think it would be extremely difficult, because I think they're being subverted, or they're being directed by outside forces.
The President. Well, a blockade is a very serious thing, and I would hope that there will—that eventuality will not arise. There are going to be maneuvers of various kinds


The President's News Conference
July 26, 1983
I dispatched Ambassador Dick Stone to the region to facilitate the process of dialog and negotiations. He's there now with a personal message from me to leaders of countries in the region, the text of which I'm making public tonight. I'm heartened by the efforts of the Contadora countries-led by Colombia, Mexico, Panama, and Venezuela-to reach a peaceful regional solution. I'm encouraged by some recent statements from Nicaragua and Cuba that seem to indicate that they, too, now recognize the merit to regional negotiations. I trust their words will be followed by positive actions to ease tension and to stop the fighting in the region.

The President. Well, I have told you, we have no military plans for intervention of that kind. We have 55, mainly noncommissioned officers helping to train the Salvadoran Army. We know that Cuba has somewhere in the neighborhood—well, it has thousands of military personnel in Nicaragua. It does seem a little overbalanced with regard to the attention that's being paid to 55 as against attention that's being paid to the thousands. I suppose what my question is, Helen, to answer with a question, is why are maneuvers that we have performed before, and regularly, suddenly treated with such suspicion when only—well, within this year, last spring, we had military maneuvers in Honduras, and last year we had naval maneuvers in the Caribbean, and no one seemed to be excited about them at all. So, is it just that there's no confidence in the fact that when I say these are maneuvers of the kind we've been holding regularly and for years? 
It hardly seems to me that those ships are going there—and I don't know that they're going to be there 6 months. I don't know what the length of time for the training is. I don't know the number of ships involved. But I didn't know the number that were involved in the Caribbean exercises. But if they were there for some kind of a hostile purpose—we happen to know that right now a Soviet freighter, the Ul'Yanov, is approaching the Port of Corinto in the vicinity of Nicaragua—that port is in Nicaragua-and it is carrying a load of military equipment, helicopters, transport helicopters for military purposes, and so forth. And no one shot at them.

The President. Well, wait a minute. That is something that has been true for a long time, as far as I'm concerned, with our troops and our forces anywhere they may be. 
We went through a period some years ago when American forces were pretty much fair game. Look back at some of our aircraft that were shot down on the charge that they had ventured out over international waters—or out of international waters, into the airspace of a Communist bloc country and shot down, and we protested diplomatically. 
It seems to me that young men and women who are going to defend this country of ours and who join the military should know that they have theright to defend themselves if we have placed them in a position where they could come under fire. And this is just a standard order. We don't want war. But I don't think that you prevent war by letting your personnel out there become the victims. 
The President. No, I don't think so. All of the ships that are down in that area and that are going there are outside the 12-mile limit. They're out in international waters where they have a right to be. 
The President. Well, since the trouble that is going on down there comes from outside the area, is revolution exported from the Soviet Union and from Cuba and from others of their allies, then wouldn't there perhaps be a risk if we changed our pattern and withdrew? Wouldn't we be sending some kind of a signal that might be the wrong kind of signal to send if we want peace in that area? 
The simple truth is no one has asked for American forces to come to their aid; in fact, they've gone quite the contrary and said the reverse—that they don't. And yet, they do acknowledge that they need the material assistance that we're giving them, both economic and to provide a shield, or help them provide their own shield against the attacks that are preventing them from making the economic progress that they want to make, now that they have installed a democratic type of government there. 
But, as I say, we've done this regularly. I don't think that it's destabilizing, nor should it be. 
The President. Well, we haven't considered that. But a great many people should know that since 1947—and so, obviously, our administration didn't have anything to do with it—there is a pact, the Rio Pact, that says that any attack, or an attack on any American State shall be considered as an attack on all American States. Now, that would require, of course, actual outside visible attack on a state and, I suppose, by a country flying under its own flag instead of under surrogate troops. 
So, we would have to deal with that problem when it arose and deal with it with all of our neighbors and friends in the Organization of American States. 
The President. Well, I said the last time we gathered that there are some things—I can make every assurance in the world that we have no such plans, we have no desire, nor do the countries down there want us involved in that way. But I used an expression that has been used by Presidents like Franklin Delano Roosevelt and others, and that is that a President should never say "never," because that's a hypothetical question that then asks you to try to predict what could possibly take place in the future. And I just don't believe you can answer a hypothetical question, unless it's— 
The President. Well, we have interdicted some of the supplies that are going from Nicaragua over to El Salvador. If you go to the source, I think you're talking about the Soviet Union. They know, and we have communicated to them, how we feel about this, and we have also to our friends in Cuba—told them how we feel about it. 
We're trying to bring about the very thing that all of you seem to think that we're shying away from, and that is not broadening a war but trying to limit it and trying to bring about a peaceful and political settlement in Central America
I can't answer your question about covert aid. I think this is like discussing intelligence matters. If you discuss covert aid, it's no longer covert. 
So, I can only tell you that we're continuing on a policy that we believe is aimed at, first of all, bringing about peace in El Salvador, hopefully through negotiations with those who are presently radicals and fighting as guerrillas, and in Nicaragua, hoping that we can persuade the Nicaraguan, the Sandinista government to return to the principles of the revolution and which they, in writing, guaranteed to the Organization of American States was going to be the policy of their government. 

Remarks at the Annual Convention of the United States Hispanic Chamber of Commerce in Tampa, Florida 
August 12, 1983

You know, I have to interrupt and tell you something, 'cause I just heard a little joke that I think some people in Cuba are telling. [Laughter] Castro was making a speech to a large audience, and he said, "They say that I am—accuse me of intervening in Angola." And a man going through the audience said, "Peanuts, popcorn? He said, "They say that I'm intervening in Mozambique," and the same voice said, "Peanuts and popcorn!" And he said, "They say I'm intervening in Nicaragua." "Peanuts and popcorn!" And by this time he's boiling mad, and he said, "Bring that man who's shouting 'peanuts and popcorn' to me, and I'm going to kick him all the way to Miami." [Laughter] And everybody in the audience started shouting, "Peanuts and popcorn!" [Laughter and applause] Thank you



Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Central America 
August 13, 1983

"Dear Mr. President: The United States has not learned any lessons from history. We refuse to understand the root causes of violence and revolution. El Salvador proves that we continue to support ruthless dictators who oppose change and abuse human freedom. And by refusing to deal decently with the Sandinista government in Nicaragua, we have forced it into the arms of Cuba and the Soviet Union. Military measures will just make things worse. Anyway, democracy can't work in Central America." End of composite letter

That brings me to Nicaragua. We have dealt decently with Nicaragua, more decently than the Sandinista government there has treated its own citizens and neighbors. The Sandinistas were not elected. They seized power through a revolution that, true enough, overthrew a dictatorship, but then the Sandinistas betrayed their repeated promises of democracy and free elections. They betrayed many who fought beside them in the revolution, and they've set up a Communist dictatorship. Having seized power, the Sandinista bosses revealed they had chosen sides with Cuba and the Soviet Union a long time ago. We did not push them into that camp. 
Well, itistime to get away from fairy tales and get back to reality. We support the elected Government of El Salvador against Communist-backed guerrillas who would take over the country by force. And we oppose the unelected Government of Nicaragua, which supports those guerrillas with weapons and ammunition. Now, that, of course, puts us in sympathy with those Nicaraguans who are trying to restore the democratic promises made during the revolution, the so-called contras



The President's News Conference
October 19, 1983
The President. I think covert actions have been a part of government and a part of government's responsibilities for as long as there's been a government. 
I'm not going to comment on what, if any, connection such activities might have had with what has been going on or with some of the specific operations down there. But I do believe in theright of a country, when it believes that its interests are best served, to practice covert activity. And then, while your people may have a right to know, you can't let your people know without letting the wrong people know, those that are in opposition to what you're doing


Remarks Announcing the Appointment of Donald Rumsfeld as the President's Personal Representative in the Middle East 
November 3, 1983

The President. I haven't believed anything they've been saying since they got in charge, and you shouldn't either. 

Remarks on Signing the Bill of Rights Day and Human Rights Day and Week Proclamation 
December 9, 1983

We cannot believe in human rights and ignore the activities of death squads in some Central American countries, the persecution of the churches and to the Miskito Indians in Nicaragua, and the resurgence of repression against national and religious groups in the Soviet Union, including Jews, Baptists, Lithuanian Catholics, Central Asian Moslems, and even members of the Russian Orthodox clergy


Interview With Marvin Stone and Joseph Fromm of U.S. News & World Report 
December 15, 1983

The President. No. We are not demanding the overthrow of that government. All they have to do is go back to the 1979 democratic commitments they made to the OAS as part of the political agreement leading to the end of the Somoza regime. Remember, the U.S. gave them immediate diplomatic recognition and significant financial aid until we found out that one faction of the revolutionaries was exiling or imprisoning their more democratic partners in the revolution, who discovered the Sandinistas intended to have a totalitarian form of government. 
Now, the Sandinistas' promises of human rights, of democratic principles, of free elections, union rights, and so forth—all of those promises were made in writing to the Organization of American States when they persuaded the OAS, during the revolution, to persuade Somoza to resign, which he did. They have not kept that contract. 
Some of the leaders of the contras were fighting alongside of them in the revolution and then were ousted, just as Castro ousted the same kind of people and imprisoned some of his best lieutenants because they wouldn't go along with him to a Communist, totalitarian form of government. 
Nicaragua could solve its problem right now. If this Nicaraguan Government wants to go back to the promises of the revolution, we'll step in and help. And what is the sixth issue


Interview With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
December 23, 1983

The President. I think that there is more they can do than they've done. I think the situation with them right now is covered by the words of Demosthenes in the Athenian marketplace 2,000 years ago when he said, "What man would let another man's words, rather then his deeds, tell him who is at peace and who is at war with him?" 
The President. No, we've made it plain. There, again, there's been contact. And Ambassador Stone has made it plain to them that all they have to do is reinstitute the principles of their own revolution—the things that they promised the people they were going to bring about if their revolution succeeded. And they have not done that. They betrayed their own revolution and created a totalitarian state. 
The President. Well, what hostile deeds have they seen? 
The President. But those rebel forces are part of their own original revolution—the people that, once they succeeded, were ousted because they wanted to institute the democratic policies. 
The President. Well, we set out after the revolution succeeded—and prior to my administration, the previous administration immediately started to come to the financial aid, economic aid, to the Sandinista government until it found out that the Sandinista government was not keeping the promise of its revolution. And the aid was withdrawn. 


Radio Address to the Nation on Recommendations of the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America 
January 14, 1984

The members also agreed that Nicaragua's regime has violated its promise to restore democracy. And they warned that Nicaragua's export of subversion could undermine the stability of neighboring countries, producing waves of refugees—perhaps millions of them—many of whom would seek entry into the United States

The Government of Nicaragua must also understand this. They cannot threaten their peaceful neighbors, export subversion, and deny basic human freedom to their own people as the Commission has so rightly observed. 
Now, you may have heard that there's a controversy between the administration and the Congress over human rights and military aid to beleaguered El Salvador. Well, I agree completely with the objective of improving prospects for democracy and human rights in El Salvador. I am also committed to preventing Cuban and Nicaraguan supported guerrillas from violently overthrowing El Salvador's elected government and others in the region; so is the bipartisan Commission; so, too, I believe, is our Congress.


Interview With the Knight-Ridder News Service on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
February 13, 1984

The President. Well, perhaps a change of tone and maybe if they were willing to get out of Nicaragua and stop interfering in other people's lives and other countries, we might think that they really meant it. And, believe me, I would like it. I think that Cuba and the Cuban people would be so much better off if Cuba would remember that it's a member of the Western Hemisphere and rejoin the family of nations over here instead of tying themselves so closely to the Soviet Union


Remarks at the Annual Convention of the National Association of Evangelicals in Columbus, Ohio 
March 6, 1984

In our own hemisphere, the Communist Sandinista regime in Nicaragua has systematically violated human rights, including the freedom to worship. Threats and harassment have forced virtually all Nicaraguan Jews to flee that country. Catholic clerics have been attacked by government-instigated mobs. Protestant religious leaders have been arrested, beaten, and deported. Dozens of Protestant churches have been burned. And today, the Sandinistas are trying to spread Communist subversion throughout Central America. If they succeed, millions of Central Americans will suffer. And our own security and economy, especially in our own southern States, would be threatened by significantly increased numbers of refugees that might stream toward the United States.


Remarks at the Young Leadership Conference of the United Jewish Appeal 
March 12, 1984

Under communism, Jews, in particular, suffer cruel persecution. Here in our own hemisphere, the Communist Sandinista regime in Nicaragua has used threats and harassment to force virtually every Nicaraguan Jew to flee his country


Interview With Agence France Presse on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
March 15, 1984

And I'm glad you mentioned Central America. We share with all the nations of Europe a firm belief that peace needs to be restored in Central America. As you know, we are working actively to assure that El Salvador's new democracy is allowed to develop without violence or guerrilla harassment. And we are determined in our view that Nicaragua and Cuba should not succeed in the export of revolution elsewhere in the region


Radio Address to the Nation on Central America 
March 24, 1984

This right of choice is not something that is common in all of Central America. It contrasts sharply, for example, with Nicaragua, where the Sandinistas staged a revolution in 1979 promising free elections, freedom of the press, freedom of religion. Despite these promises, the Sandinistas have consistently broken their word, and the elections that they've announced for November seemed designed only to consolidate their control. 
Unlike El Salvador, the Nicaraguans don't want international oversight of their campaign and elections. When the members of the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America visited Nicaragua, the Sandinista dictators briefed them with Soviet intelligence and said the U.S. is the source of all evil. 
Nicaragua is a Communist dictatorship armed to the teeth, tied to Cuba and the Soviet Union, which oppresses its people and threatens its neighbors. 
The Bipartisan Commission warned that new Communist regimes could be expected to fall into the same pattern as Nicaragua; namely, expand their armed forces, bring in large numbers of Cuban and Soviet bloc advisers, and increase the repression of their own people and the subversion of their neighbors. And the Commission warned that a rising tide of communism would likely produce refugees, perhaps millions of them, many of whom would flee to the United States. 
Military assistance is crucial right now to El Salvador. The Salvadoran people repudiated the guerrillas when they last voted in 1982, but continued Soviet-Cuban-Nicaraguan support for the guerrillas, combined with the failure of our Congress to provide the level of military aid I've requested, have put El Salvador in an extremely vulnerable position. The guerrillas have been seizing the identification cards that allow citizens to vote. One of El Salvador's principal guerrilla commanders has pledged an all-out effort to disrupt the elections. And, should there be a need for an election runoff in late April or May, these same guerrillas, who have already assassinated elected congressmen in El Salvador, will do everything they can to disrupt that election as well.


Interview With Steven R. Weisman and Francis X. Clines of the New York Times on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
March 28, 1984

The President. Well, the answer to that is, first of all, this particular government of Nicaragua's is a government that was set up by force of arms. The people have never chosen it. It's a revolutionary government. And that government, in violation of its pledge to us at a time when it was a revolutionary force trying to become a government, had promised that it would not aid the guerrillas in El Salvador, who are attempting to overthrow a duly elected government and a democratic government. And they have violated that. The guerrillas are literally being directed from bases near Managua. They're being supplied by that government. And the other factor with regard—and why I have referred to them on occasion as freedom fighters is because many of them are elements of the same revolution that put the Sandinista government in force. 
The revolution against the Somoza dictatorship—and our government, under the previous administration, sat back and never lifted a finger in behalf of Somoza and then, when the fighting was over, did start to give financial aid to the revolutionary government to help it install itself—and had to cancel that when it discovered what that government was doing. During the revolution against Somoza, the revolutionaries appealed to the Organization of American States—of which we're a member also—and appealed to that organization to ask Somoza to step down and end the bloodshed. And the Organization of American States asked for a statement of what were the goals of the revolution. And they were provided: democracy, a pluralistic government, free elections, free labor unions, freedom of the press, human rights observed—those were the goals of the revolution, submitted in writing to the Organization of American States. 
After they got in, they followed the pattern that was followed by Castro in Cuba. Those other elements 'that were not Sandinista, other groups who wanted—and they thought all the same thing, democracy—to rid themselves of a dictatorship. Those elements were denied participation in the government. Arrests were made. There were some who were exiled. There were some, I'm afraid, were executed. And many of the people now fighting as so-called contras are elements of the revolution. And it is less an overthrow that they're fighting for as it is a demand that they be allowed to participate in the government and that the government keep its promises as to what it had intended for the people. 
And I see no dichotomy in our supporting the Government, the democratic Government of El Salvador, and the contras here. And we've made it plain to Nicaragua-made it very plain that this will stop when they keep their promise and restore a democratic rule and have elections. Now, they've finally been pressured; the pressure's led to them saying they'll have an election. I think they've scheduled it for next November. But there isn't anything yet to indicate that that election will be anything but the kind of rubber-stamp that we see in any totalitarian government. How do you have—there aren't any rival candidates; there aren't any rival parties. And how would they campaign without a free press?



The President's News Conference
April 4, 1984
The President. No, our interest in Nicaragua-I'm not going to comment on that one way or the other, or the tactics that are used in a war of that kind. Our interest in Nicaragua is one and one only. The present Government of Nicaragua is exporting revolution to El Salvador, its neighbor, and is helping, supporting, arming, and training the guerrillas that are trying to overthrow a duly elected government. And as long as they do that, we're going to try and inconvenience that government of Nicaragua until they quit that kind of action



Radio Address to the Nation on Central America 
April 14, 1984

Much has been made of late regarding our proper role in Central America and, in particular, toward Nicaragua. Unfortunately, much of the debate has ignored the most relevant facts. Central America has become the stage for a bold attempt by the Soviet Union, Cuba, and Nicaragua to install communism, by force, throughout this hemisphere. 
The struggling democracies of Costa Rica, Honduras, and El Salvador are being threatened by a Soviet bloc and Cuban-supported Sandinista army and security force in Nicaragua that has grown from about 10,000 under the previous government to more than 100,000 in less than 5 years. 
More than 40 new military bases and support facilities have been constructed in Nicaragua—all with Soviet bloc and Cuban support—and an investment of over $300 million. In addition to money and guns, there are now more than 2,500 Cuban and Soviet military personnel in Nicaragua, another 5,000 so-called civilian advisers, as well as PLO, East bloc [East German], and Libyan assistance to the Sandinistas. 
And that's not all. Our friends in the region must also face the export of subversion across their borders that undermines democratic development, polarizes institutions, and wrecks their economies. This terrorist violence has been felt by all of Nicaragua's neighbors, not just El Salvador. There have been bombings in peaceful Costa Rica and numerous attempts to penetrate Honduras-most recently last summer, when the Sandinistas infiltrated an entire guerrilla column [colony] which had been trained and equipped in Cuba and Nicaragua. 
El Salvador, struggling to hold democratic elections and improve the conditions of its people, has been the main target of Nicaragua's covert aggression. Despite promises to stop, the Sandinistas still train and direct terrorists in El Salvador and provide weapons and ammunitions they use against the Salvadoran people. If it weren't for Nicaragua, El Salvador's problems would be manageable, and we could concentrate on economic and social improvements. 
Much of the Sandinista terror has been aimed at the Nicaraguan people themselves. The Sandinistas who govern Nicaragua have savagely murdered, imprisoned, and driven from their homeland tens of thousands of Miskito, Rama, and Suma Indians. Religious persecution against Christians has increased, and the Jewish community has fled the country. The press is censored, and activities of labor and business are restricted. 
The Sandinistas have announced elections for November, but don't hold your breath. Will new parties be permitted? Will they have full access to the press, TV, and radio? Will there be unbiased observers? Will every adult Nicaraguan be allowed to vote? Given their record of repression, we should not wonder that the opposition, denied other means of expression, has taken up arms. 
We've maintained a consistent policy toward the Sandinista regime, hoping they can be brought back from the brink peacefully through negotiations. We're working through the Contadora process for a verifiable multilateral agreement, one that ensures the Sandinistas terminate their export of subversion, reduce the size of their military forces, implement their democratic commitments to the Organization of American States, and remove Soviet bloc and Cuban military personnel. 
But the Sandinistas, uncomfortable with the scrutiny and concern of their neighbors, have gone shopping for a more sympathetic hearing. They took their case to the United Nations, and now to the International Court of Justice. This does little to advance a negotiated solution, but it makes sense if you're trying to evade the spotlight of responsibility


Remarks at a White House Luncheon for the National Hispanic Leadership Conference 
April 17, 1984

Nicaragua, with the full support of its Cuban and Soviet allies, is arming, supplying, and directing an insurgency operation in El Salvador. If they succeed, it will set the course for the rest of Central America.


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on the Trip to China 
May 1, 1984

The President. I, uh, no, I explained our Central America situation to them, and they understood—all of them that I talked to understood very well—when I pointed out that you had a reverse situation between the two countries there. You had one country in which the government was trying to help the guerrillas overthrow a duly elected government on the other side—and this is what we're objecting to-and the fact that the El Salvador Government has offered amnesty to the guerrillas and asked for them to participate in the electoral process. And the guerrillas have refused. On the other side in Nicaragua, the guerrillas, the contras, have asked to lay down their arms and participate in the democratic process, and the Government of Nicaragua has refused. It's a complete opposite situation in, in the two countries.


Remarks at a Luncheon With Community Leaders in Fairbanks, Alaska 
May 1, 1984

In Central America, our friends are not only struggling for democracy; they're battling for their lives against a Soviet-sponsored Nicaraguan power play. Our nation cannot afford to permit Soviet-sponsored guerrillas to shoot their way into power and turn Central America into a string of Marxist-Leninist dictatorships


Address to the Nation on United States Policy in Central America 
May 9, 1984

They are presently challenging us with a different kind of weapon: subversion and the use of surrogate forces, Cubans, for example. We've seen it intensifying during the last 10 years, as the Soviet Union and its surrogates move to establish control over Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Angola, Ethiopia, South Yemen, Afghanistan, and recently, closer to home, in Nicaragua and now El Salvador. It's the fate of this region, Central America, that I want to talk to you about tonight. 
The issue is our effort to promote democracy and economic well-being in the face of Cuban and Nicaraguan aggression, aided and abetted by the Soviet Union. It is definitely not about plans to send American troops into combat in Central America. Each year, the Soviet Union provides Cuba with $4 billion in assistance, and it sends tons of weapons to foment revolution here in our hemisphere. 
Central America is a region of great importance to the United States. And it is so close: San Salvador is closer to Houston, Texas, than Houston is to Washington, DC. Central America is America. It's at our doorstep, and it's become the stage for a bold attempt by the Soviet Union, Cuba, and Nicaragua to install communism by force throughout the hemisphere.
There have been a number of high-level, bilateral meetings with the Nicaraguan Government, where we presented specific proposals for peace. I have appointed two Special Ambassadors who have made more than 10 trips to the region in pursuit of peace during the last year. And Central America's democratic neighbors—Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, and Panama—have launched a comprehensive initiative for peace through what is known as the Contadora process. The United States fully supports the objectives of that process. 
I want to tell you a few things tonight about the real nature of the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua. 
The Sandinistas, who rule Nicaragua, are Communists whose relationship and ties to Fidel Castro of Cuba go back a quarter of a century. A number of the Sandinistas were trained in camps supported by Cuba, the Soviet bloc, and the PLO. It is important to note that Cuba, the Sandinistas, the Salvadoran Communist guerrillas, and the PLO have all worked together for many years. In 1978 the Sandinistas and elements of the PLO joined in a "declaration of war" against Israel. 
The Cuban-backed Sandinistas made a major attempt to topple the Somoza regime in Nicaragua in the fall of 1978. They failed. They were then called to Havana, where Castro cynically instructed them in the ways of successful Communist insurrection. He told them to tell the world they were fighting for political democracy, not communism. But most important, he instructed them to form a broad alliance with the genuinely democratic opposition to the Somoza regime. Castro explained that this would deceive Western public opinion, confuse potential critics, and make it difficult for Western democracies to oppose the Nicaraguan revolution without causing great dissent at home. 
The Sandinistas listened and learned. They returned to Nicaragua and promised to establish democracy. The Organization of American States, on June 23, 1979, passed a resolution stating that the solution for peace in Nicaragua required that Somoza step down and that free elections be held as soon as possible to establish a truly democratic government that would guarantee peace, freedom, and justice. The Sandinistas then promised the OAS in writing that they would do these things. Well, Somoza left, and the Sandinistas came to power. This was a negotiated settlement, based on power-sharing between Communists and genuine democrats, like the one that some have proposed for El Salvador today. Because of these promises, the previous U.S.. administration and other Western governments tried in a hopeful way to encourage Sandinista success. 
It took some time to realize what was actually taking place, that almost from the moment the Sandinistas and their cadre of 50 Cuban covert advisers took power in Managua in July of 1979, the internal repression of democratic groups, trade unions, and civic groups began. Right to dissent was denied. Freedom of the press and freedom of assembly became virtually nonexistent. There was an outright refusal to hold genuine elections, coupled with the continual promise to do so. Their latest promise is for elections by November 1984. In the meantime, there has been an attempt to wipe out an entire culture, the Miskito Indians, thousands of whom have been slaughtered or herded into detention camps, where they have been starved and abused. Their villages, churches, and crops have been burned. 
The Sandinistas engaged in anti-Semitic acts against the Jewish community, and they persecuted the Catholic Church and publicly humiliated individual priests. When Pope John Paul II visited Nicaragua last year, the Sandinistas organized public demonstrations, hurling insults at him and his message of peace. On this last Good Friday, some 100,000 Catholic faithfuls staged a demonstration of defiance. You may be hearing about that demonstration for the first time right now. It wasn't widely reported. Nicaraguan Bishop Pablo Antonio Vega recently said, "We are living with a totalitarian ideology that no one wants in this country"—this country being Nicaragua. 
The Sandinista rule is a Communist reign of terror. Many of those who fought alongside the Sandinistas saw their revolution betrayed. They were denied power in the new government. Some were imprisoned, others exiled. Thousands who fought with the Sandinistas have taken up arms against them and are now called the contras. They are freedom fighters. 
What the Sandinistas have done to Nicaragua is a tragedy. But we Americans must understand and come to grips with the fact that the Sandinistas are not content to brutalize their own land. They seek to export their terror to every other country in the region. 
I ask you to listen closely to the following quotation: "We have the brilliant revolutionary example of Nicaragua . . . the struggle in El Salvador is very advanced: The same in Guatemala, and Honduras is developing quickly . . . very soon Central America will be one revolutionary entity .... "
That statement was made by a Salvadoran guerrilla leader in March of 1981. 
Shortly after taking power, the Sandinistas, in partnership with Cuba and the Soviet Union, began supporting aggression and terrorism against El Salvador, Honduras, Costa Rica, and Guatemala. They opened training camps for guerrillas from El Salvador so they could return to their country and attack its government. Those camps still operate. Nicaragua is still the headquarters for Communist guerrilla movements. And Nicaraguan agents and diplomats have been caught in Costa Rica and Honduras supervising attacks carried out by Communist terrorists. 
The role that Cuba has long performed for the Soviet Union is now also being played by the Sandinistas. They have become Cuba's Cubans. Weapons, supplies, and funds are shipped from the Soviet bloc to Cuba, from Cuba to Nicaragua, from Nicaragua to the Salvadoran guerrillas. These facts were confirmed last year by the House Intelligence Committee. 
The Sandinista regime has been waging war against its neighbors since August of 1979. This has included military raids into Honduras and Costa Rica, which still continue today. 
And they're getting a great deal of help from their friends. There were 165 Cuban personnel in Nicaragua in 1979. Today that force has grown to 10,000. And we're being criticized for having 55 military trainers in El Salvador. Manpower support is also coming from other parts of the terror network. The PLO has sent men, and so has Libya's dictator, Qadhafi. Communist countries are providing new military assistance, including tanks, artillery, rocket-launchers, and help in the construction of military bases and support facilities. 
Just last week a Soviet ship began unloading heavy-duty military trucks in Nicaragua's Corinto Harbor. Another Soviet ship is on its way with more trucks and 155 Soviet jeeps.
Nicaragua's own military forces have grown enormously. Since 1979 their trained forces have increased from 10,000 to over 100,000. Why does Nicaragua need all this power? Why did this country of only 2.8 million build this large military force? 
They claim the buildup is the result of the anti-Sandinista forces. That's a lie. The Sandinista military buildup began 2.5 years before the anti-Sandinista freedom fighters had taken up arms. 
They claim the buildup is because they're threatened by their neighbors. Well, that, too, is a lie. Nicaragua's next-door neighbor Costa Rica doesn't even have an army. Another neighbor, Honduras, has armed forces of only 16,000. 
The Sandinistas claim the buildup is in response to American aggression. And that is the most cynical lie of all. The truth is they announced at their first anniversary, in July of 1980, that their revolution was going to spread beyond their own borders. 
When the Sandinistas were fighting the Somoza regime, the United States policy was hands off. We didn't attempt to prop up Somoza. The United States did everything to show its openness toward the Sandinistas, its friendliness, its willingness to become friends. The Carter administration provided more economic assistance to the Sandinistas in their first 18 months than any other country did. But in January of 1981, having concluded that the Sandinistas were arming the Salvadoran guerrillas, the Carter administration sent military aid to El Salvador. 
As soon as I took office, we attempted to show friendship to the Sandinistas and provided economic aid to Nicaragua. But it did no good. They kept on exporting terrorism. The words of their official party anthem describe us, the United States, as the enemy of all mankind. So much for our sincere but unrealistic hopes that if only we try harder to be friends, Nicaragua would flourish in the glow of our friendship and install liberty and freedom for their people. The truth is, they haven't. 
I've told you that Cuba's and Nicaragua's present target is El Salvador. And I want to talk to you about that country, because there's a lot of misunderstanding about it. 
By aiding the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador, Nicaragua's unelected government is trying to overthrow the duly elected government of a neighboring country. Like Nicaragua, the Government of El Salvador was born of revolution, but unlike Nicaragua it has held three elections, the most recent a Presidential election last Sunday. It has made great progress toward democracy. In this last election, 80 percent of the people of El Salvador braved Communist threats and guerrilla violence to vote for peace and freedom. 
Let me give another example of the difference between the two countries, El Salvador and Nicaragua. The Government of El Salvador has offered amnesty to the guerrillas and asked them to participate in the elections and democratic processes. The guerrillas refused. They want to shoot their way into power and establish totalitarian rule. 
By contrast, the contras, the freedom fighters in Nicaragua, have offered to lay down their weapons and take part in democratic elections, but there the Communist Sandinista government has refused. That's why the United States must support both the elected government of El Salvador and the democratic aspirations of the Nicaraguan people. 
Let's remember the Soviet bloc gave Cuba and Nicaragua $4.9 billion in assistance last year, while the United States provided all its friends throughout all of Central America with only a fraction of that amount. 

The President's News Conference
May 22, 1984
Most of our aid, three-quarters of it, is economic assistance. But security assistance is essential to help all those who must protect themselves against the expanding export of subversion by the Soviet bloc, Cuba, and Nicaragua. 
Also, as I said in my speech to the Nation on May 9th, we must support the democratic aspirations of the people of Nicaragua and oppose the Sandinista aggression against their neighbors and who seek genuinely democratic elections in Nicaragua, as the Sandinistas promised the OAS in 1979. 
Peace can only be achieved in Central America if the forces of democracy are strong. We strongly support multilateral efforts toward peace, especially the Contadora process. However, no lasting peace settlement through the Contadora process can be achieved unless there is simultaneous implementation of all the Contadora objectives, including genuinely democratic elections in Nicaragua. The freedom fighters in Nicaragua have promised to lay down their arms and to participate in genuinely democratic elections if the Sandinistas will permit them. 
Our Congress faces some historic decisions this week. Those who struggle for freedom everywhere are watching to see whether America can still be counted upon to support its own ideals. The people of El Salvador are watching, the freedom fighters of Nicaragua are watching, Nicaragua's threatened neighbors are watching, and the enemies of freedom are watching as well



Interview With Brian Farrell of RTE-Television, Dublin, Ireland, on Foreign Issues 
May 28, 1984

By the same token, in Nicaragua, the Sandinista government—which is as totalitarian as anything in Cuba or the Soviet Union-indeed, they are the puppets of Cuba and the Soviet Union—that government, the so-called freedom fighters there—or if they prefer to call them guerrillas—they are former revolutionaries who were aligned with the Sandinistas in the revolution to overthrow the authoritarian government of Somoza. And once they were in, the Sandinistas, which is the, as I say, totalitarian element, Communist element, they got rid of their allies in the revolution and have broken every promise that the revolutionaries-when it was still going on—made to the Organization of American States as to free elections, human rights, freedom of the press, freedom of religion. 
The present Government of Nicaragua-right now, the Catholic bishops are protesting as far as they can, at the risk of great persecution—they embarrassed one bishop by parading him through the streets of the capital naked. Now, the Archbishop of San Salvador has been quoted by this disinformation network here and there as being one who wants America to stop lending aid, military aid, to the Government of El Salvador. He has refuted that. He has denied that and said no. He knows that the others—the guerrillas—are getting outside support, and he knows from whence it comes. And he has said, no, he does not want us to leave. 
So, the program we have is one in which three out of four dollars will go to help establish a democratic economy and society in El Salvador, and only one dollar is going in military aid. You can't have social reforms in a country while you're getting your head shot off by guerrillas. 
The President. How do they explain, then, the Miskito Indians, which, even under the Somoza authoritarian government, were allowed to have their own communities, their own culture and religion and so forth, and almost upon taking office, the Sandinista government marched its forces into those Miskito villages, burned their crops, burned their homes, their villages, and then confined as many as they could in concentration camps? But thousands of them fled across the borders. Now, we know an awful lot about some of those Miskitos, because some of our medical personnel in our military are helping taking care of them where they are in refugee camps in Honduras. 
All I can suggest to some of these people who are saying this in Europe and who have evidently been propagandized is—and I don't mean this to sound presumptuous-but is there any one of them that has access to all the information that the President of the United States has? I'm not doing this because I've got a yen to involve ourselves or spend some money. But I do know that when the Sandinista—well, the revolution won in Nicaragua, the previous administration immediately set out to help them-financial aid to that government. And it was only a few days before my inauguration when that administration had irrefutable evidence that the Nicaraguan Government was supplying arms and materiel to the guerrillas in El Salvador, attempting to overthrow a duly elected government that was trying to be a democracy. And he put a hold on any further help. 
Now, we came into office a few days later, and we still had to find out for ourselves. We thought if there is a possibility of negotiating some kind of a settlement—and so, on that basis, we renewed the aid—financial aid that was going to them and tried to deal with them. By April we had found out that, no, there was no honor, no honesty. They were totalitarian, but more than that, they openly declared that their revolution knows no boundaries, that they are only the beginning of what they intend to be further revolution throughout all of Latin America.

The President. Those were homemade mines that couldn't sink a ship. But let me ask you this. Right now, there is a Bulgarian ship unloading tanks and armored personnel carriers at a port in Nicaragua. That is the fifth such Bulgarian ship in the last 18 months. Just a week or two ago, there were Soviet ships in there unloading war materiel. Now, the Nicaraguan Government—the Sandinista government is funneling this through to the guerrillas in El Salvador. Indeed, the headquarters for the guerrilla movement in El Salvador is only a few miles from the capital of Nicaragua, in Nicaragua where the strategy is planned and the direction of their revolution is taking place. 
Now, it seems to me that if you're going to justify people trying to bring this present Nicaraguan Government back to the original promise of the revolution, to modify its totalitarian stand, and you're going, at the same time—and one of the reasons we were offering help is to interdict those arms and weapons that were going to the El Salvador guerrillas, but you know that a flood of that materiel is coming in through the ports and being unloaded, that you're going to try to think of a way to interdict that. 
And those were homemade mines, as I say, that couldn't sink a ship. They were planted in those harbors where they were planted by the Nicaraguan rebels. And I think that there was much ado about nothing


Interview With Foreign Journalists 
May 31, 1984
The President. The—and again, I have problems with those of you who are further out there. This domed room has terrible acoustics here. [Laughter] I think you're asking about El Salvador and Nicaragua, our Central American— 
And the guerrillas, of course, are being supplied by way of Nicaragua—through Nicaragua by Cuba and the Soviet Union-not only with weapons, but with replacements, with personnel. And now the guerrillas are resorting to kidnapping. They're rounding up—going into villages and rounding up even just youngsters off the streets and simply taking them, forcing them to be guerrillas. And as would happen—the law of averages—every once in a while some of those youngsters escape and get away, and so we know that this is the practice and what they're doing. 


Toasts of the President and Prime Minister Garret FitzGerald of Ireland at a Dinner Honoring the President in Dublin 
June 3, 1984

Ireland is a small country with a nightmare past. More than most people, therefore, we are deeply concerned at the violent tyranny that tears apart small countries like Afghanistan, at the repression that seeks to still the powerful instinct for freedom in Eastern European countries like Poland, and at the deprivation of human rights in so many countries of Latin America. With many of these Latin American countries our people have close emotional ties through the work of our priests and nuns and lay helpers there who seek to relieve the poverty of the people and to give them back their dignity of which they've been deprived by oppressive regimes. Our people's deep concern is that these problems be resolved peacefully by the people of the region themselves—in Central America, along the lines proposed by the Contadora countries. In this connection, I might add that many people in Ireland have been most heartened by the news of Secretary Shultz's visit to Nicaragua on Friday last and hope that this may lead to the restoration of normal relations between that small state and your great country, thus enhancing the climate for peace and democracy in that troubled region


Address Before a Joint Session of the Irish National Parliament 
June 4, 1984

Three times in little more than 2 years, the people of El Salvador have voted in free elections. Each time they had to brave the threats of the guerrillas supported by the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua and by Cuba and the Soviet Union. These guerrillas use violence to support their threats. Their slogan in each one of those elections has been, "Vote today and die tonight." Yet the people of El Salvador, 1.4 million of them, have braved ambush and gunfire and trudged for miles to vote for freedom and then stood in line for hours waiting their turn to vote. 
All the United States is attempting to do—with only 55 military advisers and $474 million in aid, three-fourths of which is earmarked for economic and social development-is give the Salvadorans the chance they want for democratic self-determination, without outside interference. But this the Government of Nicaragua has been determined not to permit. 
By their own admission, they've been supplying and training the Salvadoran guerrillas. In their own country they have never held elections. They have all but crushed freedom of the press and moved against labor unions, outlawed political freedoms, and even sponsored mob action against Nicaragua's independent human rights commission and imprisoned its director. 
Despite this repression, a hundred thousand Nicaraguan Catholics attended a rally on Good Friday this year to support their church, which has been persecuted by the Sandinistas' Communist dictatorship. And the bishop has now written a pastoral letter citing this persecution of the church by that government. And yet, even in our own country we didn't read anything of that demonstration. Somehow word of it didn't get out through the news channels of the world. 
In a homily to 4,000 Nicaraguans packed into Don Bosco Church several weeks ago, the head of the Nicaraguan Bishops Conference, Bishop Pablo Antonio Vega, said, "The tragedy of the Nicaraguan people is that we are living with a totalitarian ideology that no one wants in this country." You may not have heard about this—again, as I say, the words of Nicaraguan Archbishop Obando y Bravo. "To those who say that the only course for Central American countries is Marxism-Leninism, we Christians must show another way. That is to follow Christ, whose path is that of truth and liberty." 
Well, the vast majority of those now struggling for freedom in Nicaragua—contrary to what the Sandinistas would have the world believe—are good and worthy people who did not like the Somoza dictatorship and who do not want the Communist dictatorship. The tragedy is they haven't been given the chance to choose. 
The people of Nicaragua and El Salvador have a right to resist the nightmare outside forces want to impose on them, just as they have theright to resist extremist violence from within whether from the left or right. The United States must not turn its back on the democratic aspirations of the people of Central America.
Those old verities, those truths of the heart—human freedom under God—are on the march everywhere in the world. All across the world today—in the shipyards of Gdansk, the hills of Nicaragua, the rice paddies of Kampuchea, the mountains of Afghanistan-the cry again is liberty. And the cause is the same as that spoken in this chamber more than two decades ago by a young American President, who said, "A future of peace and freedom."



The President's News Conference
June 14, 1984
The President. I want both these programs. I want jobs for the young people, the summer jobs, and I want the Nicaraguan aid



Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Elected Republican Women Officials 
June 29, 1984

The President. It would affect it dramatically and drastically, and we're not going to give up on that fight. We have a totalitarian government in Nicaragua that took power out of the barrel of a gun, then did what Castro did in Cuba when he won the revolution-kicked out of the revolution all the people who honestly wanted true democracy. 
Most of the contras we were trying to support are people who were once part of the revolution, but who were ousted, and the Communist element took over. And there is a totalitarian government now in Nicaragua. And the Nicaraguan Government is supporting and providing ammunition and weapons to the guerrillas in El Salvador who are trying to overthrow a government that was duly elected by the people, and it's had three elections since that is democratic and not totalitarian at all. 
And we're just going to have to keep fighting and convince the people of this country that to listen to those who would shut off Nicaragua is to listen to people-the same people who criticize and say that we're willing to support right-wing dictatorships, but never do we see anything from the left. Well, we're supporting people who are fighting for democracy and freedom. And those people who shut off that aid are supporting a totalitarian dictatorship in Nicaragua


Remarks on Signing the Captive Nations Week Proclamation 
July 16, 1984

The citizens of Nicaragua are the latest to join this unhappy lot, victims of the campaign of persecution against liberty and faith that follows every Communist takeover. The Archbishop of Managua, Miguel Obando y Bravo, and the members of his flock have recently been singled out as enemies by the Sandinista regime. Last week the Archbishop said, "We're in the presence of a Marxist-Leninist government that cannotaccept an independent Church. The government's goal," he said, "is to eliminate the Church, to eliminate priests who are loyal to the Pope and to the Church hierarchy." And Pope John Paul II said, "I express my firm disapproval in my intimate participation in the suffering of the Church in Nicaragua." And I know I speak for millions of Americans who join the Pope in saying we, too, disapprove, and yes, people of Nicaragua, we, too, suffer with you

And today I'm appealing to those who refuse to help the freedom fighters in Nicaragua, refuse to assist their courageous struggle for democracy, for freedom of the press, and for freedom of assembly and worship in their homeland. I urge you to ponder long and hard, to reflect on the fatal consequences of complacency and isolationism, and, above all, to understand that freedom is never more than one generation away from extinction. 
It's vital for the sake of our own future that the Congress and the American people respond to the democratic aspirations of the Nicaraguan people. Freedom's greatest shield is a shield of truth, and our shield is stronger today than ever before


Remarks to an Outreach Working Group on United States Policy in Central America 
July 18, 1984

Tomorrow will be an especially poignant anniversary for our democratic Nicaraguan friends. They'll recall the joy that they felt 5 years ago. A dictatorship was defeated, and a democracy was promised for their future by the Sandinistas, who had led the revolution. But the Sandinista revolution is a revolution betrayed, a revolution that has left in its wake a trail of broken promises, broken hearts, and broken dreams. 
Tragically, there is far less personal freedom, far more repression in Nicaragua today than there was 5 years ago. And I'm told there are several among you here who have seen firsthand the truth of these words. 
The Nicaraguan people are trapped in a totalitarian dungeon, trapped by a military dictatorship that impoverishes them while its rulers live in privileged and protected luxury and openly boast their revolution will spread to Nicaragua's neighbors as well. It's a dictatorship made all the more insulting, all the more dangerous by the unwanted presence of thousands of Cuban, Soviet-bloc, and radical Arab helpers. 
I know you've heard how the Catholic Church has been persecuted and treated as an enemy by the Sandinista regime. When the priests who were expelled from Nicaragua reached Costa Rica last Monday they celebrated a mass in San Jose with Archbishop Roman Arrieta of San Jose. The Archbishop said in his homily, "There were still in the world men and women of good will who did not believe a totalitarian regime had enthroned itself in Nicaragua." Then he said, "Now those people know the truth." 
The Pope, who was so outrageously insulted during his mass in Managua in March of 1983, asked for prayers for the church in Nicaragua. He expressed his disapproval and his intimate suffering with those who live under the boot of Sandinista oppression. And as I said on Monday at the marking of Captive Nations Week, I know I speak for millions of Americans who join the Pope in saying: We, too, disapprove. And, yes, people of Nicaragua, we, too, suffer with you. 
If the Sandinistas want cooperation and friendship from the civilized world, then they can start by treating their own citizens in a civilized manner. They can start honoring their promises of freedom—freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom of worship. And they can agree to abide by the most basic and honorable principle of a democracy: that government must derive its legitimacy from the consent of the governed. 
All of us who cherish democratic values should insist the Sandinistas permit genuinely open and fair and free democratic elections. We must insist that the Sandinistas, like their Guatemalan, Honduran, and El Salvadoran neighbors, open their doors to representatives from democratic organizations to observe their upcoming elections, especially the Organization of American States, OAS, because it was to the OAS that they promised democracy. And the OAS recognized the Sandinista regime based on these promises


Remarks at a Summit Conference of Caribbean Heads of State at the University of South Carolina in Columbia 
July 19, 1984

But what was happening in Grenada was not an isolated incident. The Soviet bloc and Cuba have been committing enormous resources to undermining our liberty and independence. Nowhere is this threat more pressing than in Nicaragua, a country which today marks the fifth year of Sandinista dictatorship. 
The Sandinista revolution, like Castro's revolution, is a revolution betrayed. And now faced with mounting internal pressures and disillusionment abroad, the Sandinistas have announced an election for November of this year. We would wholeheartedly welcome a genuine democratic election in Nicaragua. But no person committed to democracy will be taken in by a Soviet-style sham election. 
The situation in Nicaragua is not promising; but if the Sandinistas would keep their original commitment, permit free elections, respect human rights and establish an independent nation, conflict in the region would subside


The President's News Conference
July 24, 1984
And, again, I think there was some demagoguery in this. But it's my understanding that all of you have been given a report-has a kind of a green cover—on the Nicaraguan situation, and it has also been delivered to every Member of the Congress. And I think if—believe me, I wouldn't "round file" those. I'd look at them, because the information is in there that reveals that everything we've said about the Sandinista government is a proven fact. They are trying to destroy El Salvador by providing the rebels there with the wherewithal to do it. They are a totalitarian government. 
But you'll also find in there a statement by Ogarkov of the Soviet military. This was prior to our rescue mission in Grenada. But he openly stated that after all the years of only having a base in the Western Hemisphere in Cuba, that now they had bases here in Nicaragua and in Grenada. Well, they don't have one in Grenada anymore. And I think that it is the responsibility of this government to assist the people of Nicaragua in seeing that they don't have one in Nicaragua


Remarks at the St. Ann's Festival in Hoboken, New Jersey 
July 26, 1984

Question four: Why do those who claim to represent the most enlightened thought on Central America refuse to listen to the testimony of one of the greatest moral leaders of our time, His Holiness Pope John Paul II? Last year John Paul went to Nicaragua on a mission of peace. He went armed only with love and a message of goodness. This is what happened to the Pope when he went into the land of the Sandinista regime. 
Two weeks ago Pope John Paul II stood on the balcony overlooking St. Peter's Square, and he said that the Sandinista government is oppressing the Catholic Church of Nicaragua. He deplored the arrest and deportation of priests. He spoke out to protect the Catholic Archbishop of Managua against repeated pressure from the Sandinistas who, the Archbishop has charged, are trying to abolish the Church of Rome and replace it with a so-called popular church


Telephone Interview With Forrest Sawyer of WAGA-TV in Atlanta, Georgia 
July 27, 1984

The President. No, actually, what those people are, those so-called guerrillas, or contras, as they're called in Nicaragua, are actually—and for the most part, people who were participants in the original revolution and then had that revolution stolen from them by the Communist Sandinistas. And some of them were ousted from the country, some of them were jailed; they were denied any part in the government. 
What we're trying to support down there is the honest desire of the people of Nicaragua to have the revolution that was promised them. The Sandinistas and the others had promised the Organization of American States that the revolution's goals were freedom of the press, freedom to have labor unions, human rights, freedom of speech and assembly, freedom of religion—all the things that we believe are democratic. 
Once in, the Sandinistas ousted the others and have a totalitarian, Marxist-Leninist—a Communist government, totalitarian and with a denial of therights of the citizens, and the people down there are being oppressed by that government. And we believe that we have an obligation to support the legitimate demands of the Nicaraguan people


Remarks at the Annual Convention of the American Legion in Salt Lake City, Utah 
September 4, 1984

You know, I can't leave this discussion without thanking all of you in the American Legion for the enormous help that you've given us on the Central American issue. It's been a long struggle and, thanks to your efforts, we're finally making progress. But the struggle isn't over yet. There are still those in the Congress who want to hinder our attempts to help El Salvador, and there is also a move underway to desert the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. So, on this issue and many others, I hope you'll think about sending a reminder to the Capital this year. I hope you'll think about ending that stalemate in Washington by voting this year for responsible candidates at the congressional level, so that this administration can have a Congress it can work with and our agenda for the future can become reality.


Remarks at the International Convention of B'nai B'rith 
September 6, 1984

In the Armed Forces, our troops have newer and better equipment, and their morale has soared as we've begun to give them the pay, the training, and the respect they've always deserved. And in foreign affairs, our country is being respected again throughout the world as a leader for peace and freedom. We've strengthened our relations with Asian allies like Korea and Japan, deepened our friendship with China. In Europe, we and our NATO allies went through months of Soviet attempts to divide us and emerged more firmly united than ever. And in Central America, we're supporting the free nations of the region against the threat posed to them by the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua. 
In July of 1983 it was my privilege to meet a brave refugee from Nicaragua, Isaac Stavisky. He told me about the 50 Jewish families who had emigrated to Nicaragua from Eastern Europe since the 1920's, and about the tragedy that befell them. But let me read you Isaac's own words: 
"Nicaraguan Jews never encountered anti-Semitism until the Sandinistas started their revolution . . . Graffiti by Sandinistas was widespread, with attacks on Jews and their religion. One was, 'Death to the Jewish pigs.' In 1978 the Sandinistas sent a strong message to the entire community when the synagogue was attacked by five Sandinistas wearing face handkerchiefs. They set the building on fire by throwing gasoline in the main entrance doors, shouting PLO victory slogans and anti-Jewish defamatory language . . . Once the Sandinistas came to power . . . they moved swiftly against Jews. Jewish-owned properties were among the first to be confiscated and Jews were forced into exile." 
Permit me to add that on the first anniversary of the Sandinista revolution, Yasser Arafat visited Nicaragua and spoke these words: "What the Nicaraguan people did in Nicaragua will be done by the Palestinians


Address to the 39th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York, New York 
September 24, 1984

In Central America, the United States has lent support to a diplomatic process to restore regional peace and security. We have committed substantial resources to promote economic development and social progress. The growing success of democracy in El Salvador is the best proof that the key to peace lies in a political solution. Free elections brought into office a government dedicated to democracy, reform, economic progress, and regional peace. Regrettably, there are forces in the region eager to thwart democratic change, but these forces are now on the defensive. The tide is turning in the direction of freedom. We callupon Nicaragua, in particular, to abandon its policies of subversion and militarism and to carry out the promises it made to the Organization of American States to establish democracy at home.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green, Ohio 
September 26, 1984

The President. No, I don't believe that. We have never had any thought in mind of armed aggression in there or of moving troops. As a matter of fact, with the memories of days gone by and gunboat diplomacy, our friends and neighbors in Latin America would be the first to say no to that. And they have—all of them—said to us, "We need your help; that is, in training and in supplies and so forth, but not your manpower. We'll provide that." And I have the greatest faith. We have seen after 400 years of mostly military dictatorships, now a democratic government in El Salvador. We, at the same time, have seen by outside interference-the Cubans and the Soviets—a totalitarian power on the mainland of the Americas: Nicaragua. 
The revolutionary forces, the Sandinistas, were only a part of the revolution that overthrew the dictator, Somoza. All who wanted democracy joined together. And then the Sandinistas did what Castro did when he took Cuba. They, once they were in, they got rid of the other elements of the revolution. They exiled them, they jailed them. Many of them are now what we call the contras. And they gave their promises, however, during the revolution, to the Organization of American States that they wanted democracy, human rights, theright to vote, theright to join unions, freedom of the press, and so forth. But once in, they took over, and they have a totalitarian form of government. And they are also aiding the people who are trying to overthrow the democratic Government of El Salvador. And we have been trying to be helpful, but it is not at the risk of our intervening there with military force



Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Glen Ellyn, Illinois
October 16, 1984

After the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, my opponent said the "winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." And that was right before the Sandinistas slaughtered the Miskito Indians, abused and deported church leaders, slandered the Holy Father, and moved to kill freedom of speech


Debate Between the President and Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale in Kansas City, Missouri
October 21, 1984

The President. No, but I'm glad you asked that question, because I know it's on many peoples' minds. I have ordered an investigation. I know that the CIA is already going forward with one. We have a gentleman down in Nicaragua who is on contract to the CIA, advising—supposedly on military tactics—the contras. And he drew up this manual. It was turned over to the agency head of the CIA in Nicaragua to be printed. And a number of pages were excised by that agency head there, the man in charge, and he sent it on up here to CIA, where more pages were excised before it was printed. But some way or other, there were 12 of the original copies that got out down there and were not submitted for this printing process by the CIA. 
The President. I'm afraid I misspoke when I said a CIA head in Nicaragua. There's not someone there directing all of this activity. There are, as you know, CIA men stationed in other countries in the world and, certainly, in Central America. And so it was a man down there in that area that this was delivered to, and he recognized that what was in that manual was in direct contravention of my own Executive order, in December of 1981, that we would have nothing to do with regard to political assassinations

The matter of Somoza—no, I never defended Somoza. And, as a matter of fact, the previous administration stood by and so did I—not that I could have done anything in my position at that time—but for this revolution to take place. And the promise of the revolution was democracy, human rights, free labor unions, free press. And then, just as Castro had done in Cuba, the Sandinistas ousted the other parties to the revolution. Many of them are now the contras. They exiled some, they jailed some, they murdered some. And they installed a Marxist-Leninist totalitarian government.


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Medford, Oregon
October 22, 1984

After the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, Mr. Mondale praised it, saying, "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we know that the Sandinistas immediately began to persecute the genuine believers in democracy and to export terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians, abuse and deport church leaders, slander the Pope, and move to kill free speech. So, why isn't my opponent speaking out now about those winds of democracy?


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Portland, Oregon 
October 23, 1984

And after the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, he praised it, saying, "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we know that the Sandinistas immediately began to persecute the genuine believers in democracy and to export terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians, abuse and deport church leaders, slander the Pope, practice anti-Semitism, and move to kill free speech. So, why isn't my opponent speaking out now?


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Seattle, Washington 
October 23, 1984

And after the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, he praised it, saying, "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we know that the Sandinistas immediately began to persecute the genuine believers in democracy and to export terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians, abuse and deport church leaders, slander the Pope, practice anti-Semitism, and moved to kill free speech. So, why isn't my opponent speaking out about that fresh wind now?


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Columbus, Ohio 
October 24, 1984

There's more about him. After the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, he praised it, saying "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we know that the Sandinistas immediately began to persecute the genuine believers in democracy and to export terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians, abuse and deport church leaders, slander the Pope, practice anti-Semitism, and move to kill free speech. So, why isn't he talking about them now?


Interview With Representatives of the Scripps-Howard News Service 
October 25, 1984

The President. Well, as I say, "I'm not so wise as those lawyer guys," as Mr. Service said in his poem. I haven't really gotten into that. I was giving you—my own personal reaction to it was it seemed to be a long and honorable tradition. And in a sense, our own interest in Nicaragua has to do with their overt support of guerrillas, themselves, who are trying to overthrow a duly elected government of a neighboring country—El Salvador. So, no one has raised the issue before of these individual Americans.


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Fairfield, Connecticut 
October 26, 1984

After the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, he praised it. He said, "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we all know that the Sandinistas immediately began to persecute the genuine believers in democracy and export terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians, abuse and deport church leaders, practice anti-Semitism, slander the Pope, and move to kill free speech. Don't you .think itistime my opponent stood up, spoke out, and condemned the Sandinista crimes?


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Hackensack, New Jersey 
October 26, 1984

After the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, he praised that. He said, "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we know that those democratic winds he was talking about were the Sandinistas persecuting the genuine believers in democracy, exporting terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians, abuse and deport church leaders, slander the Pope, practice anti-Semitism, and move to kill free speech. Don't you think itistime that he stood up and spoke out and condemned the Sandinistas' crimes?


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Millersville, Pennsylvania 
October 29, 1984

After the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, he praised it, saying, "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we know that the Sandinistas immediately began to persecute the genuine believers in democracy, to export terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians, abuse and deport church leaders, practice anti-Semitism, slander the Pope, and move to kill free speech. Don't you think itistime my opponent stood up, spoke out, and condemned these Sandinista crimes?


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Media, Pennsylvania 
October 29, 1984

After the Sandinista revolution down there in Nicaragua, he praised it by saying, "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we know that the Sandinistas immediately began to persecute the genuine believers in democracy and to export terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians by the thousands, abuse and deport church leaders, slander the Pope, and move to kill free speech, and practiced anti-Semitism. Don't you think itistime for my opponent to stand up, speak out, and condemn the Sandinista crimes?


Remarks at a Reagan-Bush Rally in Parkersburg, West Virginia 
October 29, 1984

After the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, he praised it, saying, "Winds of democratic progress are stirring where they have long been stifled." But we know that the Sandinistas immediately began to persecute the genuine believers in democracy and to export terror. They went on to slaughter the Miskito Indians in that country, abuse and deport church leaders, slander the Pope, practice anti-Semitism, and move to kill free speech. Don't you think it's about time that my opponent stood up and spoke out and condemned the Sandinistas crimes?


Interview With Editors of the Hearst Corporation 
October 30, 1984

No, we won't close the door to that—just as in Central America now, with Nicaragua. We've had a man meeting the Nicaraguan Government representatives and talking what is needed—we're not—this whole thing—let's make it plain, and this involves the contras, too—it isn't overthrow of a government. It is getting that revolutionary government to return to the principles of revolution that it enunciated when it was fighting the revolution, which was democracy, human rights, free press, free labor unions, and so forth. 
But you have to keep trying. And one thing out of this election—the very fact that men like Cruz will not run, I think, has brought out into the open how much dissatisfaction there is among the people of Nicaragua with the present regime

Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters in Rochester, Minnesota 
November 4, 1984

The President. I've said many times, Bill [Bill Plante, CBS News], that there is no intention on our part whatsoever of troops going into Latin America anyplace, or any military help of that kind, nor has it been asked by anyone in Latin America. As a matter of fact, I think they would be very much opposed to it. They've expressed that feeling to us.
On the other hand.— 
The President. On the other hand, should a President ever be in the position of, perhaps, encouraging more aggression down there by making such a statement? I'm just going to tell you that we have no plans whatsoever, nor any desire, to put forces into Latin America. 
The President. Yes, because the Sandinista government is still supporting the guerrillas that are fighting against the duly elected government of El Salvador


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
November 7, 1984

The President. Well, I can't comment on any plan of what we might do. Right now, we have no—we, ourselves, have been alerted, and we've been surveilling that ship, but we cannot definitely identify that they have Mig's on there or planes of any kind. But we're keeping a careful watch. And then, as I say, I'm not going to comment on what might follow or what our procedure would be. 
The President. Well, I think it would be. We have informed them that for them to bring something that is absolutely unnecessary for them—these high performance craft, in here—indicates that they are contemplating being a threat to their neighbors here in the Americas



Interview With Representatives of the Washington Times 
November 27, 1984

The President. Well, this is one of the things where I think the Congress, up till now, has been shortsighted and, in fact, irresponsible with regard to that situation down there. And we know that there was a kind of a consensus of feeling just recently among them, when they believed, as we all did, that possibly that ship was bearing high-performance planes, Mig's, to Nicaragua. We don't know for sure that it wasn't. We can't prove that it was; we can't prove that it wasn't, because of some maneuverings that went on. But there are six more Russian ships, as nearly as we can count, that are on their way to Nicaragua now with more arms. I think that maybe, if they remember that feeling that they had with regard to the possibility of high-performance planes, that they will see that there is value in our carrying on. 
What we have are revolutionaries that only a short time ago they and the Sandinistas were all on the same side, fighting the same revolution—and fighting it ostensibly, and by their own claim, for democratic processes. Now, they got in and, a la Cuba under Castro, the one faction took over, has created a totalitarian Marxist state, and the others are still in the revolution, still trying for the democratic principles that they'd fought for in the beginning. And the very fact that the Sandinista element is continuing to support revolutionaries who are trying to overthrow a duly elected government, this is of itself of great interest to us. 
The President. Well, we have let them and we've let the Soviet Union know that this is something we cannot sit back and just take, if they do that, because that is so obviously, then, a threat to the area. That's not—well, their whole military today isn't defensive. Their whole military is greater than all the combined countries of Central America put together, and it's so obviously offensive in nature that we can't ignore that. And that would be just the crowning thing to have those high-performance planes representing a threat to the area and to the hemisphere. And we've made it plain that we're not going to sit by quietly and accept that. 
The President. I don't know whether it is or not. I know they 
The President. Yeah. I know they do things like that. And so, we're keeping watch on what's there. We're not going to raise Cain over a purely domestic type cargo, or anything of that kind, but we are in contact with the Soviet Union. 
The President. No. We do know that in several of the ports where those ships have touched down, there have been evidence of those aircraft and crates that could contain them. And we want to know that after the ships leave, those aircraft are still there. 


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Jaime Lusinchi of Venezuela 
December 4, 1984

The exception to this trend in Central America is Nicaragua, where a ruling clique of Sandinistas, allied with Cuban and Soviet dictators, have betrayed their citizens. Despite their assurances in 1979 to the people of Nicaragua, and to the Organization of American States, that they would hold genuinely democratic elections, they have, to the contrary, persecuted the democratic opposition parties, trade unions, and civic and religious organizations. Instead of free elections, they chose to hold a Communist-style sham election, orderly in form, but without the participation of the democratic opposition, because Sandinista-controlled gangs of thugs beat down freedom of speech and assembly, wiping out any chance for genuine political competition. 
President Lusinchi, I hope you will work with me to ensure that the pledges of free elections and real democracy made to the OAS and to the Nicaraguan people are carried out.



Interview With Tom Winter and Joseph Baldacchino, Jr., of Human Events 
December 6, 1984

The President. Oh, we're going to try. I think that Congress, or that portion of it that's been blocking us, has been very irresponsible. The contras are veterans of the revolution that put the Sandinistas in power. And it was a total revolutionary effort aimed at democracy. 
You only have to look at the promises the Sandinistas made to the Organization of American States, none of which have been kept. And what we're supporting are the people of Nicaragua who have now been subjected to a totalitarian, Marxist-Leninist state. 
The President. Well, this would give us something that we would have to look at very closely, because right now we can honestly say that what we're trying to do is simply modify the existing situation and return to the principles that all of the parties and elements opposed to Somoza, including the Sandinistas, were fighting for, according to what they said. 
Now, it's been revealed that they didn't mean it when they said it. Recognition of a government in exile would probably present some problems—very definite problems for us.


Remarks on Signing the International Human Rights Day Proclamation 
December 10, 1984

So, we call today for all free peoples of the world to unite in resisting and bringing to an end such intolerable practices as the suppression of free trade unionism, the campaign against the church and against political freedom in Nicaragua, the continuing Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, and the barbaric war waged by Soviet troops in Afghanistan—a war which began 5 years ago this month with the Soviet invasion of that once nonaligned country


The President's News Conference
January 9, 1985
The President. Well, Jerry, as you know, I shouldn't be talking about anything that is supposed to be covert, but I will say this: that our plans, we have no plans for abandoning the overall ideas of help such as were created by the Kissinger commission down there—program proposed for over about the next 5 years to help those nations that are trying to become democracies to be democracies, and to support the people of Nicaragua, who, I have to point out, are governed by a group that took over by force—ousted others that had been fighting for a revolution. And I think that—and they are supporting the guerrillas that are trying to overthrow the duly elected Government of El Salvador. And, no, we're not retreating from what we feel are obligations there in Central America at all



Remarks at the Western Hemisphere Legislative Leaders Forum 
January 24, 1985

Our efforts are guided by three consistent and mutually reinforcing goals: We seek to promote the development of democratic political institutions; we want to encourage economic growth, which will increase opportunity and improve the standard of living for people throughout the hemisphere; we're willing to help our friends defend themselves against Soviet bloc, Cuban, and Nicaraguan sponsored subversion

The subversion we're talking about violates international law. The Organization of American States, in the past, has enacted sanctions against Cuba for such aggression. The Sandinistas have been attacking their neighbors through armed subversion since August of 1979. Countering this by supporting Nicaraguan freedom fighters is essentially acting in self-defense and is certainly consistent with the United Nations and OAS Charter provisions for individual and collective security


Interview With Representatives of Independent Radio Networks 
January 26, 1985

The President. Well, as far as I want to go here is to say that it's very evident that they have sought their advice. I believe that very possibly there has been some help in training and in certain types of munitions now that have come to them from Iran. The whole problem also is this: That we know that Iran has backed and supported certain terrorist activities. We also know that there are representatives of most of the prominent terrorist groups, worldwide, in Nicaragua giving advice and training and help to the Sandinista government. 
The President. Oh, I think the United States faces an imminent threat of terrorism from a number of groups not only for that reason but for other reasons that have to do with our relations with the Communist bloc, our activities in the Middle East. We know that our people, worldwide, have been targeted and American institutions targeted. And we're doing everything we can to minimize that threat and to work with our allies and the other democratic nations to try and exchange intelligence information, to see if we can't treat with those criminals the way we treat with other criminals, by way of Interpol
The President. Well, a President should never say never, but I can tell you right now that we've never had any plans at all. We've realized that that would be counterproductive, even with regard to our friends in Latin America. So, we're continuing to work with the Contadora, we're continuing to work with the other Central American nations down there to be helpful. The Kissinger commission report, that called for aid that would be mainly social aid and economic aid and only military help in the line of training and arms and so forth and equipment. And that's still going to be our policy



Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union 
February 6, 1985

We must stand by all our democratic allies. And we must not break faith with those who are risking their lives—on every continent, from Afghanistan to Nicaragua—to defy Soviet-supported aggression and secure rights which have been ours from birth. 
The Sandinista dictatorship of Nicaragua, with full Cuban-Soviet bloc support, not only persecutes its people, the church, and denies a free press, but arms and provides bases for Communist terrorists attacking neighboring states. Support for freedom fighters is self-defense and totally consistent with the OAS and U.N. Charters. It is essential that the Congress continue all facets of our assistance to Central America. I want to work with you to support the democratic forces whose struggle is tied to our own security.


Interview With a Group of Senior Executives and Staff Members From the Wall Street Journal 
February 7, 1985

The President. The purpose of aiding them is to aid literally the people of Nicaragua, who are striving to get the government that the revolution promised them. If you'll recall during the revolution, the revolutionary forces appealed to the Organization of American States for help. And they asked the Organization if they would please try to persuade Somoza to step down and, thus, end the bloodshed. And, in return for this, they gave the Organization of American States the declaration of principles of what it was they were seeking in the revolution. And this was pure democracy. This was all the civil rights and human rights, freedom of speech, freedom of labor unions, freedom of religion, and all of these things. 
Well, what happened was the faction known as the Sandinistas took over. They ousted a number of other revolutionary leaders; some of them were exiled; some, I think, were done away with; some imprisoned. 
But they have set up a totalitarian government. They've made it plain: Their allies are Cuba, the Soviet Union, the Communist bloc, even Mr. Qadhafi, and now Iran is getting into the picture. But they've set up a totalitarian government. They have betrayed the principles that the people of Nicaragua were fighting for. And what we think is that we should be on the side of those people who actually are only asking for the democracy that they'd fought a revolution to get. 
The President. Well, when you answer a question that simply, though, and you come back, then, you see, you get into the thing—well, are you talking about individuals or are you talking—you're talking about the governmental form. Now, if that governmental form can come by way of the people who are presently in that government and who then will be willing to stand for elections at appropriate times, that's fine. But that's what it's really all about, is getting the revolution the people fought for.


Interview With Bernard Weinraub and Gerald Boyd of the New York Times 
February 11, 1985

With regard to Nicaragua, I think that we should continue to offer support to the people of Nicaragua who have been betrayed in the revolution that they, themselves, supported. 
That revolution was supposed to result in democracy. And assurances were given by the people who were fighting the revolution and leading it. Then the Sandinistas did what Castro before them had done in Cuba. Once the revolution was successful, they ousted from the government, or any participation in government, all the other factions that were dedicated to democracy and have instituted a totalitarian regime. 
And what the Nicaraguan people want is the revolution they fought for. And I think they're entitled to have it. 
The President. Well, they certainly are part of the people, and they were part of the revolution in many instances. The thing that so many people that are arguing against this don't seem to be aware of a difference between, for example, Nicaragua and El Salvador. El Salvador now, after several elections, is a government that is striving for democracy, that was chosen by the people. And the people trying to overthrow it, the guerrillas in El Salvador, are trying to overthrow a government that the majority of the people elected. 
In Nicaragua, the so-called Sandinista government is a government that seized power out of the barrel of a gun; it's never been chosen by the people. And it has directly contravened the principles of the revolution that they were fighting. And I think there's every reason for the contras to be representing those who continue to strive for the democracy that they fought a revolution to get. 
The President. Well, Jerry, I don't know what—when we talk about this, are we talking about the people that are in the government or the form of government? If it's the people, obviously those who have grabbed power are not going to want to give it up; that's typical of totalitarianism. But as to the other part—all the Sandinistas would have to do is go back to what they, themselves, participated in promising to the Organization of American States—that they wanted democracy, they wanted free voting, they wanted free labor unions, they wanted a free press and all—and subject themselves—or submit themselves, I should say, and anyone else who chooses to, to the will of the people by way of the elections and voting. 
The President. Well, I still believe in covert programs where they're necessary and where they're desirable. And so, once you say that, then there are some limits as to what you can specify


Radio Address to the Nation on Central America 
February 16, 1985

Nowhere do we see this more than in Nicaragua, whose Sandinista government is a Marxist-Leninist clique that broke the hearts of the freedom-loving people of their country by imposing a brutal dictatorship soon after taking control in 1979. Functioning as a satellite of the Soviet Union and Cuba, they moved quickly to suppress internal dissent, clamp down on a free press, persecute the church and labor unions, and betray their pledge to hold free elections. Now they're exporting drugs to poison our youth and linking up with the terrorists of Iran, Libya, the Red Brigades, and the PLO. The Sandinistas aren't democrats, but Communists; not lovers of freedom, but of power; not builders of a peaceful nation, but creators of a fortress Nicaragua that intends to export communism beyond its borders. 
The true heroes of the Nicaraguan struggle—non-Communist, democracy-loving revolutionaries—saw their revolution betrayed and took up arms against the betrayer. These men and women are today the democratic resistance fighters some call the contras. We should call them freedom fighters. 
Sandinista propaganda denounces them as mercenaries and former National Guardsmen of the Somoza dictatorship; but this is a lie. The freedom fighters are led by those who oppose Somoza, and their soldiers are peasants, farmers, shopkeepers, and students—the people of Nicaragua. These brave men and women deserve our help. They do not ask for troops, but only for our technical and financial support and supplies. We cannot turn from them in their moment of need; to do so would be to betray our centuries-old dedication to supporting those who struggle for freedom. This is not only legal, it's totally consistent with our history.
And now the free people of El Salvador, Honduras, and, yes, of Nicaragua ask for our help. There are over 15,000 freedom fighters struggling for liberty and democracy in Nicaragua and helping to stem subversion in El Salvador. They're fighting for an end to tyranny and its only reliable product: cruelty. They are our brothers. How can we ignore them? How can we refuse them assistance when we know that, ultimately, their fight is our fight? We must remember that if the Sandinistas are not stopped now, they will, as they have sworn, attempt to spread communism to El Salvador, Costa Rica, Honduras, and elsewhere. 
The freedom fighters are putting pressure on the Sandinistas to change their ways and live, not as Communist puppets, but as peaceful democrats. We must help. Congress must understand that the American people support the struggle for democracy in Central America. We can save them, as we were once saved, but only if we act and now 


The President's News Conference
February 21, 1985

The President. Well, remove in the sense of its present structure, in which it is a Communist totalitarian state, and it is not a government chosen by the people. So, you wonder sometimes about those who make such claims as to its legitimacy. We believe, just as I said Saturday morning, that we have an obligation to be of help where we can to freedom fighters and lovers of freedom and democracy, from Afghanistan to Nicaragua and wherever there are people of that kind who are striving for that freedom. 
The President. Well, what I'm saying is that this present government was one element of the revolution against Somoza. The freedom fighters are other elements of that revolution. And once victory was attained, the Sandinistas did what Castro had done, prior to their time, in Cuba. They ousted and managed to rid themselves of the other elements of the revolution and violated their own promise to the Organization of American States—as a result of which they had received support from the Organization-that their revolutionary goal was for democracy, free press, free speech, free labor unions, and elections, and so forth, and they have violated that. 
And the people that are fighting them, the freedom fighters opposing them, are Nicaraguan people who want the goals of the revolution restored. And we're going to try to help. 
The President. Not if the present government would turn around and say, all right, if they'd say: "Uncle. All right, come on back into the revolutionary government, and let's straighten this out and institute the goals.
The President. I think that what we're doing and what we have proposed doing is within the U.N. Charter and within the OAS Charter and theright of people to do what the freedom fighters are doing. You can say it's like saying, is the glass half full or half empty? You can say we're trying to oust the Sandinistas by what we're saying. 
We're saying we're trying to give those who fought a revolution to escape a dictatorship, to have democracy, and then had it taken away from them by some of their fellow revolutionaries—we're saying we want them to have a chance to have that democracy that they fought for. And I don't think the Sandinistas have a decent leg to stand on. 
What they have done is totalitarian. It is brutal, cruel. And they have no argument against what the rest of the people in Nicaragua want. 

Remarks at the Annual Dinner of the Conservative Political Action Conference 
March 1, 1985

They are our brothers, these freedom fighters, and we owe them our help. I've spoken recently of the freedom fighters of Nicaragua. You know the truth about them. You know who they're fighting and why. They are the moral equal of our Founding Fathers and the brave men and women of the French Resistance. We cannot turn away from them, for the struggle here is not right versus left; it is right versus wrong


Interview With Morton Kondracke and Richard H. Smith of Newsweek Magazine 
March 4, 1985

The President. Well, maybe that was an unfortunate choice of words for what I was trying to say, because it inevitably has created a different image than I had in mind. The questions had to do and was dealing with the military pressure from the contras, which is certainly affecting their economy. And we know that there is widespread dissatisfaction among the people. 
We know that their new increase in the draft has driven the families that can do it to getting their young men—their sons out of the country. There's quite a traffic to Panama and from there then on to other places—of these young men—so that pressure, and then with the Contadora and what they've been trying to impose on them or persuade them to adopt. 
What I meant by the term was that—and it was also in a refutation of saying that we want the overthrow of the government as such—like a coup—that throws them out and treats them as they've treated others. That, no, what we want is that they finally give in to saying we will restore the original goals of the revolution, because the contras are made up and led by revolutionaries who fought against Somoza. And all they're saying is: "This isn't what we fought the revolution for." And the total revolution, put in writing to the Organization of American States—when they asked for their help, they asked the OAS to persuade Somoza to step down and end the bloodshed. And the OAS said: "What are your goals? What do you want? Why should we help?' 
And they gave them the statement, and it was pure democracy: elections, a pluralistic society, free press, free labor unions, all of these things. And the OAS asked Somoza to step down, and Somoza did. Whatever else anyone may think of him, he said, "If it will stop the bloodshed, yes." And he stepped down. The revolution was over, except that the Sandinistas then kept on with their own kind of revolution and gradually got rid of—gradually—almost suddenly—got rid of the other elements in the revolution that really wanted the democracy, because the Sandinistas were Communist to begin with. And now they have a totalitarian government. 
Now, here are the contras—here's a funny situation. Here in El Salvador is a democratic, elected government that has tried repeatedly to negotiate with its guerrillas and say, come in and participate in the elections—be a part of the democratic process. And the guerrillas won't. 
Over here in Nicaragua are the guerrillas, and I prefer to call them freedom fighters, who are saying to the government, "Let us participate. Let us get back into the democratic process." And it's the Sandinista government-the totalitarian government says "No, we won't talk to you." And that's all I meant by, "Uncle." [Laughter]


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters 
March 11, 1985

The President. Well, we have to believe that there will be a change. And this is one of the reasons why we're hoping we can still persuade the Congress to support us in our desire to support the contras that I call freedom fighters there, because these are people who are participants in the revolution that overthrew Somoza. And then they were thrown out of the revolution that they had helped bring about. 
They did much as Castro did in Cuba in the beginning—the Sandinistas, I mean. They simply took over that revolution, and they have violated their promise to the Organization of American States. They asked for help from the Organization in getting Somoza to step down. And he did step down at the request of the Organization, and that ended the bloodshed. And in doing that, they had promised the Organization of American States that their goal was democracy: free elections, free labor unions, freedom of the press, observance of human rights, as should be in a democracy. And they have violated every one of those promises with a totalitarian form of government. 
Now, I believe that it is our place to lend help to those people of Nicaragua who still want the original revolution and want a democracy there. And we're going to continue to try to help them.
And, on the other hand, we see their expansionism-we see it in Afghanistan and Ethiopia and Angola and yes, in Cuba and Nicaragua. So, I'd like to have a talk and see if some way we can't some day have a meeting of minds and recognize that we-well, that delegation that's just going home from here—I asked the leader of that delegation when they were going to go to Texas and California to see if they couldn't look at the American people—the people around them, the working people of this country-and ask themselves if they thought there was any way that Americans would rather be in a war than living the way we live. And they didn't get much time to look at that.



Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session During a White House Briefing for Members of the Magazine Publishers Association 
March 14, 1985

And, so, too, ourcommitment is to those who are struggling for freedom around the world. That's particularly true in Central America where a democratic revolution in Nicaragua was hijacked by a small cadre of Marxist-Leninists. They are totalitarians. They share an all too familiar obsession with personal power, and they hold to a prideful and corrupt desire to rule and dominate the lives of others. We owe those who oppose these totalitarians the best assistance that we can give them.


Toast at a Luncheon With Provincial and Community Leaders in Quebec City, Canada 
March 18, 1985

Freedom movements are rising up—from Afghanistan to Cambodia, Angola, Ethiopia, and Nicaragua. More than twice as many people are fighting in the field right now against the Nicaraguan Communist regime as fought against Somoza. The weight of the world is struggling to shift away from the dreary failures of Communist oppression into the warm sunlight of genuine democracy and human rights


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Raul Alfonsin of Argentina 
March 19, 1985

In Nicaragua Communists, who were just one faction in the broad coalition that pledged to replace their former dictatorship with democracy, quickly seized control of the organs of power. The vast majority of those fighting for true democracy in Nicaragua for freedom of speech, religion, and press—actively opposed the former dictatorship. And the Nicaraguan people are joining the ranks of the freedom fighters. Nearly three times as many men are fighting the Communists right now as the Sandinistas had fighting Somoza before they seized power. 
The free people of this hemisphere must not stand by and watch the Communist tyranny imposed on Nicaragua spread to the free lands of the Americas. We, like you, support the search for peace through the efforts of the Contadora group, strongly believing that if all 21 objectives were implemented, including the genuine democratization of Nicaragua, the Central American nations could live in peace and democracy

The President's News Conference
March 21, 1985
The President. No, we haven't thought about that at all. And yet I must say that this matter that's before the Congress of whether it's $14 million or whatever—that isn't the issue. 
The issue is the United States is trying to help people who had a Communist tyranny imposed on them by force, deception, and fraud. And either we continue with that tradition, which has always been ours, or we give that up entirely. And I don't think we should give that up. I think our position is clear

Remarks at a White House Briefing for Central American Leaders 
March 25, 1985

Well, welcome all of you to the White House. And I want to express my deepest appreciation to you, the Concerned Citizens for Democracy; to Carlos Perez, who helped you organize your Spirit of Freedom Flight; and to the Jefferson Educational Foundation, your hosts here in Washington. We welcome you as neighbors, and we welcome you as fellow Americans. You represent the countries of Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, and Venezuela. And you've come to Washington at your own expense to share with us and our Congress the most compelling truth of our time: the dream of a bright future for democracy, economic progress, and stability in this hemisphere. And it's all within our grasp. But that dream can quickly become a nightmare if we don't stand behind the brave men who are putting their lives on the line for the cause of freedom in Nicaragua. 
But the Soviet Union has its own plan for Central America, a region which Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko described as "boiling like a cauldron." In the last 5 years, the Soviets have provided more military assistance to Cuba and Nicaragua alone than the United States has provided to all of Latin America. The Soviets' plan is designed to crush self-determination of free people, to crush democracy in Costa Rica, Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Panama. It's a plan to turn Central America into a Soviet beachhead of aggression that could spread terror and instability north and south, disrupt our vital sealanes, cripple our ability to carry out ourcommitments to our European allies, and send tens of millions of refugees streaming in a human tidal wave across all our borders. 
Already the Nicaraguan people are fleeing the Sandinista tyranny, escaping into your neighboring countries. In just the last few weeks, thousands of Nicaraguans have fled to Costa Rica. They tell of rising resistance to the Sandinista dictatorship, a dictatorship that speaks reassuring words of peace to the outside world, even as it has moved to crush personal freedoms, attack the church, nearly wipe out an entire culture-the Miskito Indians—summarily execute suspected dissidents, drive leading democrats into exile, and force young boys to defend the revolution while Soviet-bloc advisers sit in Managua living off the people. 
Just last week the Sandinistas started the forced movement of tens of thousands of people from Jinotega and Murra in order to create "free fire zones." And they're using Stalin's tactic of Gulag relocation for those who do not support their tyrannical regime. 
The United States was on the side of democracy during the fight against Somoza, and we're on the side of democracy today. When the Sandinistas came to power promising democracy, we gave them more aid than any other developed country—$119 million from 1979 to 1981, plus support for $244 million more from the Inter-American Development Bank. How did they respond to America's outstretched hand of friendship, trust, and generosity? 
Well, the Sandinistas became, as they had always planned, eager puppets for the Soviets and the Cubans. They created their own Karl Marx postage stamps. They sang an anthem that called the United States the enemy of all mankind. They brought in East Germans to organize their state security. They became a rubber stamp for the Communist bloc in the U.N., voting against the democracies on virtually every crucial issue, from refusing to condemn Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia to notaccepting Israel's credentials. 
While the United States was offering friendship and providing unprecedented sums of aid, the Sandinistas were building up an army that dwarfed and bullied their neighbors. While Americans were debating the Sandinistas true intentions, Tomas Borge, the Sandinista Minister of the Interior, who received his training from the Soviets, Cubans, and PLO, was saying, "You cannot be a true revolutionary in Latin America without being Marxist-Leninist." Well, while we were bending over backward to be friendly and helpful, the Sandinistas were already conspiring to bring Communist revolution to all of Central America. 
As far back as 1969, they pledged to "struggle for a true union of the Central American peoples within one country, beginning with support for national liberation movements in neighboring states." Once in power in Nicaragua, they began working for their revolution, without frontiers, in which small, democratic, unarmed Costa Rica would be—and I quote their words-"the dessert." Well, today the PLO is honored with an Embassy in Managua. And, in addition to their close ties with the Soviets, Cubans, and East Germans, the Sandinistas receive support from Bulgaria, Vietnam, and North Korea. The radical states of Iran and Libya also have established military ties with the Sandinistas in a "new" Nicaragua, which also harbors members of the Red Brigades, the ETA, and other terrorist organizations. 
And all this is taking place only a few hundred miles from our shores. The Sandinistas are masking these deeds behind wellrehearsed rhetoric of disinformation intended to lull the world in the weeks ahead. But you know their true intentions. You know what happened when a broad coalition of exiled Nicaraguan democrats recently met in San Jose and offered to lay down their weapons, if only the Sandinistas would accept democracy and free elections. The Sandinistas not only refused, but their state security rounded up the editor of La Prensa, the president of the Private Enterprise Council, and other leading democrats in Managua and threatened: If you meet with the members of the San Jose group, then "you will suffer the consequences." 
Well, hasn't the time come for all freedom-loving people to unite in demanding an end to the Sandinistas intimidation? 
And, you know—look, Nicaraguan freedom fighters don't ask us to send troops; indeed, none are needed, for the Nicaraguan people are coming over to their side in ever-greater numbers. The freedom fighters have grown to a force more than two times bigger than the Sandinistas were before they seized power. Their freedom fighters are people of the land; they're the true revolutionaries. They are the hope for a future of democracy, and with our help, democracy can and will be restored. 

Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Central America 
March 30, 1985

But another crucial challenge must be squarely faced. It's a challenge that I and members of my administration will be presenting to you with the utmost seriousness in the days ahead, for it goes to the heart of American security. I'm talking about the Soviet-Cuban-Nicaraguan plan to destroy the fragile flower of democracy and force communism on our small Central American neighbors—a plan that could, for the first time, bring tyranny to our own borders, carrying the same specter of economic chaos, the same threat of political terrorism, the same flood tides of refugees we've seen follow every Communist takeover from Eastern Europe to Afghanistan, Laos, Vietnam, Cambodia, Ethiopia, and, now, Central America. 
Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko described the region on our doorstep as "boiling like a cauldron" and urged revolution. We know that the Soviets turned Grenada into a warehouse of violence. They did this in the last 5 years, and they provided more military assistance to Cuba and Nicaragua than we did to all of Latin America. And we know that the support Nicaragua gets from Cuba, Bulgaria, East Germany, North Korea, Libya, the PLO, and Iran is a threat to our security, because the dictators of Cuba and Nicaragua have not only pledged to spread communism, they've been caught—forgive me—red-handed trying to do just that. 
Right now Havana and Managua are waging a campaign of disinformation to cover up their deeds and reassure the American people with soft words of peace. A secret Nicaraguan memo leaked to the Wall Street Journal and reported yesterday revealed how the Communists have used propaganda to smear their opponents, tighten censorship, and confuse the outside world. 
There are other examples of the regime's true intent. On March 1st, exiled Nicaraguan leaders, representing a broad pro-democracy movement, met in San Jose, Costa Rica, and made this offer: The freedom fighters in Nicaragua would agree to a cease-fire if the Communist regime will negotiate, permit free elections and genuine democracy. The answer came back quick, loud, and clear: Forget it. 
U.S. support for the freedom fighters is morally right and intimately linked to our own security. If we refuse to help their just cause, if we pull the plug and allow the freedom fighters to be wiped out by the same helicopter gunships the Soviets are using to murder thousands of Afghans, then our ultimate price to protect peace, freedom, and our way of life will be dear indeed.


Interview With Lou Cannon, Dave Hoffman, and Lynn Downie of the Washington Post 
April 1, 1985

The President. Well, yes, I think there are more people who are opposing the regime right now in Nicaragua than actually fought in the revolution against Somoza. And it seems to be growing—the unhappiness of the people. You only have to look at the flood of refugees that are escaping from Nicaragua to realize that the people of that country are not happy with that totalitarian regime. 
The President. Well, I know the Contadora is still trying to find an answer of that kind. The contras, themselves, have offered to lay down weapons and go into negotiations in an effort to have what they had fought the revolution for, and that is a democracy. And so, I think, as long as the people of Nicaragua are still striving for the goals of the revolution that they themselves fought, I think that we're obligated to try and lend them a hand. 
The President. Well, nothing that I can talk about here. But let me just say, I know this about what the polls show, and I know what happens up on the Hill. But we've been subjected in this country to a very sophisticated lobbying campaign by a totalitarian government, the Sandinistas. There has been a disinformation program that is virtually worldwide, and we know that both the Soviets and the Cubans have such a disinformation network that is beyond anything that we can match. And, of course, I don't think the people have heard the thing that we're tying to explain of what is going on. 
People go down, some people, to Nicaragua and claim they come back now with views that are favorable to that totalitarian government. But why don't they go to some of the neighboring countries and talk to the thousands and thousands of refugees and ask them why they fled Nicaragua? 
The President. I don't know. That's something I'd have to face if they do this. We're not alone in helping them. As a matter of fact, in spite of the polls, there is more and more private support for the contras. 

Remarks Following Discussions With President Belisario Betancur Cuartas of Colombia 
April 4, 1985

We join you in seeking a comprehensive and fully verifiable settlement of regional problems. And we, like you, believe peace can be achieved through national reconciliation and democracy. Colombia and El Salvador, for example, have invited talks with their opponents and encouraged them to be part of a truly democratic process. Those who seek democracy in Nicaragua have asked the Sandinistas to engage in talks as a step toward peace and democracy in Nicaragua. We hope that the Sandinistas will take that step toward reconciliation. 
Later today I will be talking to the American people in greater detail about this subject. I am glad that President Betancur and I were able to discuss how the United States can best help the Contadora countries achieve all of the agreed-upon objectives for Central America, including national reconciliation in Nicaragua


Remarks Announcing a Central American Peace Proposal and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters 
April 4, 1985

On March 1st in San Jose, Costa Rica, the leaders of the Nicaraguan democratic resistance met with a broad coalition of other exiled Nicaraguan democrats. They agreed upon and signed an historic proposal to restore peace and democracy in their country. The members of the democratic resistance offered a cease-fire in return for an agreement by the Nicaraguan regime to begin a dialog, mediated by the Bishops Conference of the Roman Catholic Church, with the goal of restoring democracy through honest elections. To date the Nicaraguan regime has refused this offer. 
The Central American countries, including Nicaragua, have agreed that internal reconciliation is indispensable to regional peace. But we know that, unlike President Duarte of El Salvador, who seeks a dialog with his opponents, the Communists in Nicaragua have turned, at least up until now, a cold shoulder to appeals for national reconciliation from the Pope and the Nicaraguan bishops. And we know that without incentives, none of this will change. 
For these reasons, great numbers of Nicaraguans are demanding change and taking up arms to fight for the stolen promise of freedom and democracy. Over 15,000 farmers, small merchants, whites, blacks, and Miskito Indians have united to struggle for a true democracy. 
We supported democracy in Nicaragua before, and we support democracy today. We supported national reconciliation before, and we support it today. We believe that democracy deserves as much support in Nicaragua as it has received in El Salvador. And we're proud of the help that we've given to El Salvador
I want to emphasize that consistent with the 21 goals of the Contadoran process, the United States continues to seek: One, Nicaragua's implementation of its commitment to democracy made to the Organization of American States; two, an end to Nicaragua's aggression against its neighbors; three, a removal of the thousands of Soviet bloc, Cuban, PLO, Libyan, and other military and security personnel; and four, a return of the Nicaraguan military to a level of parity with their neighbors

The President. Well, to end the bloodshed that is going on, to end the great economic crisis that is growing ever more worse in their country because of what they've done.

The President. Well, we're not going to quit and walkaway from them no matter what happens. 
The President. It isn't a case of overthrowing, it is a case of returning to the goals of the revolution that both the contras and the Sandinistas fought for. And as far as our making war or anything, that has never been our intention. And we've repeated that over and over again. 
The President. I said after 60 days, if no agreement can be reached and unless both sides ask us to continue the same process, then, I would think that we could use that $14 million to help the contras in any way
The President. No. We think that this is part of the agreement that must be reached. We said these are the points that were made also by the contras, that they must stop being a threat to their neighbors, get the foreign forces out, and return to the democratic goals which they, themselves, told the Organization of American States was what they were fighting the revolution for. 
The President. We are just in the process of notifying people of this. You're among the first to hear. 
The President. Because I think there are other things that are involved here. I don't think that they want to be alone completely in the Americas with all of their neighbors on the other side. And we believe that we'll have the support of the Contadoras on this. And we think, as I say, they are having great problems as these hostilities go on.
Now, no, you. 
The President. Well, I have a feeling that they are not well-fixed enough to provide any of these things for themselves. And this, again, is one of the things that we have offered, that this will be used for that purpose for as long as they're negotiating to try and have a peaceful settlement. 
The President. Well, let me say I think that they are close to desperate straits. But I'm going to leave here now because I'm going to be seeing you later in the day

 
Informal Exchange With Reporters 
April 5, 1985
The President. Well, they were saying that before they even heard what the plan was. I can understand it; they don't want to give up the cushy spot that they've got right now. But we believe that the people of Nicaragua will be highly supportive of this because they still want the goals that they fought for in the revolution. 
The President. No. That's one of the things we're complaining about. We want them to have more of a say. 
The President. Well, I think when they see the Contadora process and neighboring countries all in support of this—and the contras are the ones who are willing to lay down their arms, to simply ask for theright to negotiate and discuss what kind of a government this should be. 
It's a curious thing that no one seems to have paid any attention that in El Salvador it was the democratic government, the elected government of the people, that asked the guerrillas there to lay down their arms, offered them amnesty and to talk about participating legitimately in the government. And it was the guerrillas that refused. In the neighboring country of Nicaragua, the contras—that some are calling the guerrillas and all, and I still say are freedom fighters—they were the ones that have made the offer to lay down their arms and enter into discussions about instituting democracy. And it was the government of Nicaragua, a totalitarian government, that refused


Radio Address to the Nation on the Federal Budget and the Central American Peace Proposal 
April 6, 1985

I'm speaking to you today from our ranch in California. And I'm happy to report that in keeping with the spirit of Passover and Easter, this week is ending on a very hopeful note. We received encouraging reaction to our peace proposal for Nicaragua, and we've reached an immensely important budget agreement that can help keep America's economic engines running full speed ahead for years to come

Now, let me give you the encouraging news about our proposal for peace and democracy in Nicaragua. As you know, we've asked both sides—the Communists and the democratic resistance—to lay down their arms. We've endorsed the proposal made by the democratic resistance, the contras, that the Catholic Church serve as mediator to restore freedom and ensure internationally supervised elections. And we've asked Congress to release $14 million for those freedom fighters—aid that will go immediately for medicines, food, and clothing and other support to help these men and their families survive. We have made this proposal in a sincere effort to start a dialog aimed at true internal reconciliation, which can bring peace and liberty to Nicaragua. 
You know, the Federal Government these days spends $14 million every few minutes, so we're asking Congress for just a few minutes worth of help for the democratic forces of Nicaragua—$14 million means very little to us, but it's a whole world to them. 
President Betancur of Colombia has called our proposal positive and constructive. More than a dozen countries, including Nicaragua's neighbors, have already expressed their support. And President Duarte wrote me yesterday to say that we're taking theright step at theright time. And he added, "Your initiative and approach have my complete support and I strongly urge all the friends of Central America in your Congress to give it their full support." 


Remarks to Reporters on the Central American Peace Proposal
April 15, 1985

Our plan has been endorsed by Nicaragua's neighbors; Presidents Duarte, Suazo, and Monge have all sent letters of strong support. Other Latin American nations view it as a positive step. El Salvador's President Duarte called it theright step at theright time and urged Members of Congress to support it. 
I'm asking Congress to join me in the bipartisan spirit so essential to our security in providing this small amount, $14 million, for the more than 15,000 Nicaraguans who are struggling for democracy. It is so little, yet such an important symbol of ourresolve, a signal to all of Central America and, yes, to those everywhere in the world who depend on us. 
Our overall policy in the region has been working, but continued success depends on Congress' prompt release of aid for the Nicaraguan democratic resistance. Democracy and peace deserve a chance. The freedom loving people of Nicaragua deserve a chance


Remarks at a Fund-raising Dinner for the Nicaragua Refugee Fund 
April 15, 1985

I want to begin by saying that I'm honored to be in the presence of those who are here from Nicaragua and all the rest of you, too. Many of you have been driven from the land of your birth by a sad turn of history, but you've refused to forget your homeland or abandon your fellow Nicaraguans. And for this you deserve, and you have, both our high regard and our thanks. 
Six years ago, many of you were part of the fight to overthrow an oppressive regime that had ruled your country for decades. You succeeded; the regime fell. And many rejoiced knowing that true freedom and true democracy would finally rise to take its place. 
But the new regime became not a democracy but a dictatorship. Communism was embraced, and Nicaragua moved into the Soviet orbit. The best of the revolution, members of the original revolutionary government who had fought for high ideals, left the country. In all, more than a quarter of a million souls fled Nicaragua, and they're fleeing still. Many of the refugees are the poorest of the poor—Indians and peasants and terrified mothers and children. All of them need our help. But even more, perhaps, they need the attention of the world. After nearly 6 years, attention must be paid. 
There's so much I want to discuss tonight, from the plight of the refugees to why they're fleeing. I want to talk about what is at stake in Central America, what is at issue, and what it means to all of us in this room, in this country, and in the West. I'll start with Nicaragua now—Nicaragua on April 15, 1985. 
As you know, the Sandinista dictatorship has taken absolute control of the government and the armed forces. It is a Communist dictatorship. It has done what Communist dictatorships do: created a repressive state security and secret police organization assisted by Soviet, East German, and Cuban advisers; harassed, and in many cases expunged, the political opposition, and rendered the democratic freedoms of speech, press, and assembly punishable by officially sanctioned harassment and imprisonment or death. 
But the Communists are not unopposed. They are facing great resistance from the people of Nicaragua, resistance from the patriots who fight for freedom and their unarmed allies from the prodemocracy movement. 
There is growing evidence of Sandinista brutality. We've recently learned that 10 or 11 members of the Social Christian Party have been rounded up and jailed. The Sandinistas are trying to get them to confess to being counterrevolutionaries. And you might be interested in knowing one way the Communists are coercing these confessions. They have also arrested more than a hundred relatives of the political prisoners. And according to our most recent information, the Social Christian Party members are being held in the dark in small, overheated cells. Prisoners are served meals at irregular intervals—after 12 hours, for instance, and then the next in another 2. The purpose is to disorient them and wear them down. Where do they get that idea? This same method has been used against political prisoners in Cuba. 
Now, we do not know the exact number of political prisoners in Nicaragua today, but we get an indication from the testimony of Jose Gonzalez, a former vice president of the Social Democratic Party. Gonzalez told Pope John Paul II there were about 8,000 political prisoners in 1981. He also told the Pope the Sandinistas practice repression and torture. Gonzalez, as you know, was arrested when he returned from Rome. He left Nicaragua and now lives in exile. 
But the most compelling evidence of Sandinista brutality and of why people are fleeing is the Sandinistas' scorched-earth policy. We know the Sandinistas have ordered and are carrying out the forced relocation of tens of thousands of peasants. We have reports that 20,000 peasants have been moved in the past 2 months from their homes to relocation camps. Peasants who have escaped call themselves hostages and call the relocation camps concentration camps. The Communists themselves had admitted they're engaged in the forced resettlement of an estimated 65,000 people. Peasants and journalists tell of entire villages, homes, stores, and churches being burnt to the ground. They tell of animals slaughtered, crops burned, and villagers taken away at gunpoint in government trucks. 
Why are the Communists doing this? Massed forced relocations are a common feature of modern Communist tyrannies, but there are other purposes here. For the people of many villages are actively supporting the freedom fighters, and so the Communists have decided to put more and more of the people of Nicaragua into closely guarded pens, and that way it will be easier for the regime to stalk the freedom fighters in the countryside. A Sandinista security chief has explained, "Anyone still in the hills is a guerrilla." 
While all this is terrible, it can hardly come as a surprise to those who know what was done to the Miskito Indians. As you know, the Miskitos supported the Sandinistas against Somoza. But shortly after taking power, the Sandinistas attempted to indoctrinate the Miskitos in Marxist dogma, and the Indians resisted. The Sandinistas tried to put their own people in as leaders of the Miskito community, and the Indians resisted, so much that the Sandinistas labeled them "bourgeois" and, therefore, enemies of the people. They began to arrest Indian leaders. Some were murdered; some were tortured. One Miskito leader told our AFLCIO that Thomas Borge and other leaders of the Sandinistas "came to my cell and warned me that Sandinismo would be established on the Atlantic coast even if every single Miskito Indian had to be eliminated." 
Well, the Sandinistas came close. There were massacres. Eyewitnesses said some Miskitos were buried alive. Ten thousand Indians were force-marched to relocation camps. Miskito villages were burned down; they're still being burned down. Miskito villages were bombed and shelled, and they are still being bombed and shelled. In the name of humanity, these atrocities must be stopped. 
Twenty thousand Indians are known to be incarcerated in relocation camps. About half are currently being held at the Tasba Pri Relocation Camps. Tasba Pri, by the way, means "free land." Well, above one "free land" camp, a New York Times reporter noted a sign that said, "Work that unites us is a revolutionary force." 
In all, tens of thousands of Miskitos have been forced to flee Nicaragua, to free the land they lived on for over a thousand years. Many now live as refugees in Honduras. 
Unfortunately, it's widely believed outside Nicaragua that the Sandinistas enjoy the support of the people inside, but you know this is completely untrue. We know this from many sources, even recently the American press. 
A few months ago, The New Republic carried a report by Robert Leiken, who had long been sympathetic to the Sandinistas and who had formerly testified in Congress against aid to the contras. He wrote, "One of the most common means of sustaining the myth of popular support is the Sandinistas' use of the rationing system as a lever-ration cards are confiscated for nonattendance at Sandinista meetings." And talk of inflation is branded as "counterrevolutionary plot." Sympathy with the contras, he said, is more and more pervasive. In fact, the peasants now call them Los Muchachos, the affectionate term they once used exclusively for the Sandinistas. And what do they now call the Sandinistas? Well, the latest worker's chant is "the Sandinistas and Somoza are the same thing." 
In spite of all this, the Sandinista government retains its defenders in this country and in the West. They look at all the evidence that the Sandinistas have instituted a Communist regime: all the pictures of dictator Ortega embracing Castro and visiting Moscow, all the Soviet-bloc advisers, and all the Sandinista votes in the U.N, such as their decision in line with the Soviet bloc to refuse the credentials of Israel. They look at this, and they say: "The Sandinistas aren't Communists, or aren't real Communists. Why, they're only nationalists, only socialists." 
But these defenders admit there is a problem in Nicaragua. The problem, they say, is the freedom fighters. Well, just a few weeks ago, the whole world was treated to a so-called independent investigation of charges that the freedom fighters have committed atrocities. It spoke of these so-called atrocities in a rather riveting manner. And the report received great attention on television and in leading newspapers and publications. The report ignored Communist brutality, the murder of the Indians, and the arrest, torture, and murder of political dissidents. But we really shouldn't be surprised by that because, as our State Department discovered and Time magazine reported, this so-called independent investigation was the work of one of dictator Ortega's supporters, a sympathizer who has openly embraced Sandinismo and who was shepherded through Nicaragua by Sandinista operatives. 
The truth is, there are atrocities going on in Nicaragua, but they're largely the work of the institutionalized cruelty of the Sandinista government. This cruelty is the natural expression of a Communist government, a cruelty that flows naturally from the heart of totalitarianism. The truth is Somoza was bad, but so many of the people of Nicaragua know the Sandinistas are infinitely worse. 
We have here this evening many individuals who know these truths firsthand. Some of you may know of Bayardo Santaeliz. He is a 29-year-old Nicaraguan refugee and a former lay preacher of the Pentecostal Missionary Church in Nicaragua. And this is his story, a story told in sworn testimony before a Honduran civil rights commission. 
A few years ago, the Sandinistas began pressuring Bayardo to stop preaching and start fighting for the revolution. And one night after holding a prayer session in a home on the slopes of the Momotombo Volcano, Bayardo went to bed. He was awakened by Sandinista soldiers who asked if he was an evangelical preacher; Bayardo said yes. The Sandinistas arrested him, accused him of counterrevolutionary activity, verbally abused him, and then tied him and two others to a pillar. Then the Sandinistas doused the house with gasoline and threw in a match. The room went up in flames, but they burned the rope that bound Bayardo, and he escaped with his clothes in flames and his body burned. He hid in the countryside and was rescued by campesinos who got him to a hospital, where he lied about the causes of his injuries. And not long after, he left Nicaragua. 
Bayardo, I wonder if you could rise for a moment, wherever you are here in the room. 
You know, I was going to ask all of you fellows with the cameras if you wouldn't kind of turn them off me and on him, but then he came up here; so I didn't ask you that. He's just one of the many who've suffered. He knows things and has experienced things that many of us in this country can barely imagine. And I think America has to see the true face of Nicaragua. Thank you, Bayardo. 
Some people say this isn't America's problem. Why should we care if Nicaragua is a democracy or not? Well, we should care for a whole host of reasons. 
None of these characteristics applies to totalitarian states, however. And so, totalitarian Nicaragua poses a threat to us all. 
The Sandinistas have been engaged for some time in spreading their Communist revolution beyond their borders. They're providing arms, training, and a headquarters to the Communist guerrillas who are attempting to overthrow the democratically elected Duarte government of El Salvador. The Sandinistas have been caught supporting similar antidemocratic movements in Honduras and Costa Rica; Guatemala, too, is threatened. If these governments fall, as Nicaragua has fallen, it will send millions of refugees north, as country after country collapses. 
Already, the refugee situation is building to unacceptable levels. More than a quarter of a million refugees have fled Nicaragua since the Sandinistas took control. Some weeks, a hundred Nicaraguans a day stream into Costa Rica alone. It must be noted here that many of these refugees carry no papers, register in no official camps, and wind up on no one's official list of those who've fled. They simply cross the border of one country or another and settle where they can. 
And let me emphasize a very important point: These refugees are not simply people caught in the middle of a war. They're people fleeing for their lives from the Sandinista police state. They are fleeing from people who are burning down their villages, forcing them into concentration camps, and forcing their children into military service. 
You know of our efforts to end the tragedy in Nicaragua. We want the killing and the bloodshed and the brutality to end. We've put forth a proposal for peace. We've asked for a cease-fire. We're asking the Sandinistas to join the democratic opposition in a church-mediated dialog. The church itself a year ago independently asked the Sandinistas for this dialog. We're asking the Sandinistas to take steps to hold truly democratic elections and restore freedom of speech, press, and assembly. 
Nicaragua's neighbors, El Salvador and Honduras and Costa Rica, have embraced this proposal. President Duarte, President Suazo, President Monge have all personally written to me to express support for this peace plan. And who bears better witness to the merits of this plan than Nicaragua's own neighbors? 
As part of our proposal, we've asked the Congress of the United States to release $14 million for food, medicine, and other support to help the patriots who believe in democracy survive in the hills of Nicaragua. This has been called a controversial request, and it's garnered some opposition in the Congress. I believe the reasons for this must be addressed. 
Some claim that the freedom fighters are simply former Somozistas who want to reimpose a dictatorship. That is simply not true. Listen to the roll call of their leaders: Adolpho Calero, a Nicaraguan businessman who was imprisoned by Somoza; Alfonso Robelo, a member of the original Sandinista government, now leading freedom fighters in the south; Arturo Cruz, another former member of the Sandinista government who is supporting the freedom fighters; Eden Pastora, the famed Commander Zero, a hero of the anti-Somoza revolution. 
These men are not putting their lives on the line to restore a dictatorship of the past; these men are fighting for freedom. Already they control large sections of the countryside. And as for their level of support, there are now three times as many freedom fighters fighting the Sandinistas as there were Sandinistas fighting Somoza. 
There are those who say America's attempt to encourage freedom in Nicaragua interferes with theright of self-determination of the Nicaraguan people. Self-determination-you wonder what the ghosts of the Miskito Indians would say to that; you wonder what the journalists who cannot print the truth and the political prisoners who cannot speak it would say about self-determination and the Sandinistas. I think they would say that when a small Communist clique seizes a country, there is no self-determination and no chance of it. 
I believe that a vote against this aid is more than a rejection of the freedom fighters. It is a rejection of all the forces of moderation from the church to the Contadora countries, which have called for freedom and democracy in Nicaragua. 
I believe one inevitable outcome of a rejection of this aid would be that it would remove all pressure on the Sandinistas to change. And if no constraints are put on the Sandinistas, I believe the brutality and abuse they already aim at their own country and their neighbors may well be magnified a thousandfold. 
Viva Nicaragua libre! Thank you, and God bless you. 
And now, I want to help Ambassador Davis, who I believe is going to give the first ever Nicaraguan Refugee Fund Humanitarian Award. And it goes this year to the executive director of Friends of the Americas, Diane Jenkins


Remarks at a Conference on Religious Liberty 
April 16, 1985

Religious persecution, of course, is not confined to Europe. We see it in Iran, whose leaders have virtually declared war on the Bahais; we see it in Afghanistan, where the Soviet military has resorted to increasingly cruel measures against the Moslem people; and we see a variation on how to abuse religious freedom in the Sandinista regime of Nicaragua. 
In Nicaragua, the Sandinista regime is faced with a politically active church that, although it supported the revolution, is now considered a major obstacle to complete totalitarian control. Sometime back, Nicaraguan Bishop Pablo Antonio Vega said that, "We are living with a totalitarian ideology that no one wants in this country." 
The Sandinistas are actively attempting to discredit and split the church hierarchy. And there's one new area to be watched. The Sandinistas, like all Communist regimes, are injecting their ideology into the educational system and have begun widespread campaigns to indoctrinate children and adults. But the Catholic Church is fighting to maintain autonomy and keep this indoctrination out of their churches and schools. I just had a verbal message delivered to me from the Pope urging us to continue our efforts in Central America. 
Well, this thing that I was mentioning has not been resolved. Cuba solved the problem by closing all private schools, including religious schools. The general state of religious liberty in Nicaragua is suggested by testimony from various sources but most vividly by those who have fled this brutal regime. 
We recently learned of a pastor of the Evangelical Church in a Nicaraguan town who told the freedom fighters that the Sandinistas had threatened to send the 3,000 members of his church to relocation camps. The pastor and his church members are now hiding out in caves and temporary settlements in the countryside. 
The Sandinistas also harass Jews. Two Nicaraguan refugees, Sarita and Oscar Kellermann, have told of the fire-bombing of their synagogue by the Sandinistas. The Sandinistas wrote on the synagogue the words, "What Hitler started we will finish." And they wrote on the Kellermann's home, "Jews out of Nicaragua." 
May I interject here that stories like these of organized coercion and brutality and terror are the reason we're asking Congress for aid to help the freedom fighters and to help the victims of the Sandinista regime. 
When I think of Nicaragua these days, it occurs to me anew that you can judge any new government, any new regime, by whether or not it allows religion to flourish. If it doesn't, you can be sure it's an enemy of mankind, for it's attempting to ban what is most beautiful in the human heart.


Remarks at a White House Meeting with the Deficit Reduction Coalition 
April 16, 1985

Well, I'd like to take a minute and ask your support on another issue today, an issue that I believe touches on the very heart and soul of what it means to be an American. In a few days, Congress will vote on whether or not to support our proposal to help put Nicaragua on a path toward peace and democracy. Recently I proposed a plan for peace and democracy in Nicaragua, an immediate cease-fire to be followed by church-mediated negotiations leading to free and honest elections and Congress supporting this peace initiative with humanitarian aid. 
Few votes will ever be so important. Either way it's decided, Congress will send a signal. A "yes" vote would signal new hope for peace and a return to the original democratic promise of the Nicaraguan revolution. But if Congress votes "no," if they in essence wash their hands of our responsibility to support peaceful development and democracy in this hemisphere, they'll be sending a message of desertion, a clear statement that the greatest democracy on Earth doesn't care if communism snuffs out the freedom of our neighbors and endangers our own security. Democracies and freedom-loving people throughout the world must be amazed and I would think deeply concerned. 
The Soviet-bloc and terrorist nations flood Nicaragua with arms and personnel, sparing no expense in support of the totalitarian Sandinista regime, while the U.S. Congress remains paralyzed over a mere $14 million in humanitarian aid, less than the cost of the deadly Hind helicopters the Soviets have given the Communists to use against the resistance, the freedom fighters. 
Meanwhile, the Sandinistas and some misguided sympathizers in this country are waging a sophisticated disinformation campaign designed to sway public opinion. A short while ago, front pages across the country blazed the reports—the news of a new report alleging human rights abuses by the freedom fighters. Now Time magazine has learned that the report was bought and paid for by the Sandinistas. It seems that the Sandinistas think they have more to gain by lobbying Congress than negotiating with the democratic opposition. As a recent article in the New York Times reported, the Sandinistas are, quote, "pinning their hopes on the U.S. Congress." 
Well, please let Congress know that there's another side, that Americans don't want the creation of another Cuba, a warehouse of subversion on the American mainland; that they don't want Libyans, the PLO, and the followers of Khomeini bunkered down just 2 hours from our southern border. Let's not let the Sandinistas be the only ones lobbying our Congress. Tell them not to sabotage our efforts for democracy in Nicaragua and peace in our hemisphere.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters 
April 18, 1985

One of the first institutions to be attacked by tyrants, whether they're dictators of the left or right, is the press. We've seen this happen far too often, and it's happening in Nicaragua today. It shouldn't be forgotten that the one incident that precipitated the uprising against the Somoza dictatorship was the assassination of Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, editor of La Prensa, the nation's largest and fiercely independent newspaper. Yet control of the press under the Somoza dictatorship, which was decried by the Sandinistas, was miniscule compared to the ironfisted censorship now endured today by Nicaraguan journalists. 
Humberto Belli, former editorial page editor of La Prensa, details this tragedy in his book, "Nicaragua, Christians Under Fire." It describes attacks by Sandinista mobs, official closings, the censorship of the news, the kidnaping and beating of reporters. It should be on the reading list of every journalist. 
Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, Jr., who took his father's place as editor of La Prensa, watched the insidious destruction of press freedom and the suppression of other fundamental human rights by the Communist regime, and he fled the country. 
Today news in Nicaragua is as controlled as that in any Eastern European state. Even a broadcast of religious services has been interfered with. The papers are filled with what the Communists consider to be good news. And as Senator Pat Moynihan once observed, countries with newspapers filled with good news are likely to have jails filled with good people. 
And the jails are being filled with good people. Recently, we learned that 10 or 11 members of the Social Christian Party were rounded up and imprisoned. To force them to confess to being counterrevolutionaries, more than a hundred family members of these political prisoners were also arrested. And that's the kind of country the Sandinistas are building. 
The other night, I told of what was happening to those 10 or 11 prisoners. And it was straight out of the Cuban handbook. They're put in overheated, dark cells. Then they are fed at varying intervals, like 12 hours between 2 meals, but giving you the next meal 2 hours later and so forth. All of it to create a disorientation and make it easier to break them down. 
This pattern, as I say, we've seen before. Bigger jails are being built, and they're called relocation camps. Refugees are pouring out of the country. What we're witnessing in Nicaragua is the imposition, with ever-increasing intensity, of a pro-Soviet dictatorship, serving as a base camp for the spread of communism in our hemisphere. 
Several years ago, there was honest disagreement over the nature of the Sandinista regime. That regime had been obscuring its true goals, deceiving its own supporters, and using a reformist cover to lull the press and potential adversaries. But by now there have been too many incautious statements, leaked memos, and secretly recorded speeches to deny the violent character and intent of this dictatorship. 
The Miami Herald, which only 8 months ago had not come to this conclusion, recently editorialized that the Sandinistas are indeed trying to establish another Cuba and that this is a severe threat to Central America and to our own national security. 
If we permit the Soviets, using the Sandinistas, to establish a beachhead on the American mainland and to spread their subversion, the free world will face a major challenge to the geopolitical balance of power. Economic instability, political subversion, and terrorism and a flood of refugees will likely be the price of our paralysis. We could turn around one day and find a string of pro-Soviet dictatorships in Central America and a threat to our southern border. 
The Communist disinformation machine is hard at work. We have reason for concern in this account about charges against the freedom fighters. For example, the falsehood that the democratic resistance is mainly composed of ex-backers of Somoza, and this is patently untrue. Yet when voiced by apologists for the Sandinista regime, that charge often goes unchallenged. 
Last week, a major publication disclosed that in handling the story of alleged crimes committed by the Nicaraguan democratic resistance, it relied on information thought to be from an independent investigation. As it turned out, the supposed investigation had been carried out by people closely aligned with the Sandinistas and was done in close collaboration with that regime. 
The President. Yes, it is the source of the subversion that is taking place. And it's not alone in Nicaragua; there it's proceeded to the point of a revolutionary government, the Sandinistas. But we do know that throughout all of Latin America, under various names, there are guerrilla groups. And invariably, they have received their training, and they received their support and encouragement from Cuba. And they are assailing the duly elected governments in many of the democracies there in Latin America
The President. Well, one that basically leaves the goal that what we're trying to get, in contrast to the propaganda of the Sandinistas that we're waiting with an upraised club to clobber them, that we want what the contras themselves asked for several weeks ago—the laying down of arms, a cease-fire, and then the coming together in a peaceful negotiation as to how they can restore the original goals of the revolution. 
But within the plan for example, the timing, we've said that the negotiations-we want the church to mediate, so there can be no question about somebody trying to pull undercover tricks. And we've set a period here for negotiation and then a checkpoint at which, if there is no evidence that the one group is trying to negotiate seriously, that then there is a trigger there that opens up more aid from us to the contras. 
Now, some have suggested that maybe that period should be longer. I'm very pleased—I'd be very willing to sit down and discuss that with them as to whether it be longer, things to do with the fencing of the money and so forth, things to do with the assurance that the money would go to food and clothing and shelter, medicine for the families of the contras


Radio Address to the Nation on the Central American Peace Proposal 
April 20, 1985

In a few days, Congress will vote on whether or not to support our proposal to help restore peace and democracy in Nicaragua. Few votes will ever be so important to the survival of democracy in Latin America and the Caribbean. Few votes will ever be so important to the national security of the United States. 
On March 1st, the leaders of the democratic resistance of Nicaragua, the so-called contras, sent a peace proposal to the Communists, who've taken over their country. The proposal called for a cease-fire and church-mediated negotiations that would lead to free and honest elections. 
We've asked the democratic resistance to extend their offer until June 1st, and we're asking Congress to show its support for peace negotiations by releasing humanitarian aid to the democratic resistance. This support is crucial. 
Negotiations would be our best and possibly last opportunity to steer the Sandinista Communists away from their present brutal course and back toward the democratic and peaceful promises of their revolution. 
The responsibility now rests squarely on the shoulders of Congress. A vote for humanitarian aid to the democratic resistance will signal the United States' resolve on this issue. And courage and resolve are the only way to convince the Sandinista Communists to come to the negotiating table. 
A vote against our proposal, however, could mean the beginning of the end to all hopes of peace and democracy in Central America. Already, the followers of Qadhafi and the Ayatollah Khomeini are in Nicaragua-about 2 hours by air from United States borders. And just this week, we confirmed the presence of Russian military personnel in the battle zones of northern Nicaragua. 
The Soviet terrorist-bloc nations know what is at stake in Nicaragua. That's why, in the 7 months since Congress cut off aid to the democratic resistance, they've been pouring in weapons and personnel to their Communist allies, hoping to wipe out the democratic forces while they're most vulnerable. 
And that's why, rather than negotiate with the democratic resistance, the Communists are still betting that the United States will abandon its friends. A recent article in the New York Times reported that the "Sandinistas pin hopes on Congress." You heard me right. The Sandinista Communists are lobbying your Senators and Representatives. Together with the misguided sympathizers in this country, they've been running a sophisticated disinformation campaign of lies and distortion. 
And now we're told that in a cynical attempt to manipulate public opinion and our Congress, the Communists may put forth an 11th hour so-called peace proposal, a proposal aimed at blocking aid to the democratic resistance and giving the Communists a free hand to tighten their grip on the Nicaraguan people. The Communists know that if they can persuade Congress to cut off aid, they'll never have to negotiate with the democratic opposition. And they believe if they can stop aid to the democratic resistance, nothing can stop them. 
The opponents of our plan in the House have announced a formula for turning the democratic resistance into homeless refugees. Their alternative to a plan for peace and democracy would only provide assistance to the democratic forces if they abandon their struggle to liberate Nicaragua—in other words, surrender to communism. They would, in fact, aid the Soviet-Cuban. Sandinista effort to get rid of the democratic resistance. 
We're asking Congress to be consistent and support those who are fighting communism in Nicaragua, just as we support the democratic resistance in Afghanistan and Cambodia. 
Let me speak plainly. Any proposal that abandons over 15,000 members of a democratic resistance to Communists is not a compromise; it's a shameful surrender. If Congress ever approves such a proposal, it would hasten the consolidation of Nicaragua as a Communist-terrorist arsenal. And it would give a green light to Soviet-sponsored aggression throughout the American mainland, ultimately threatening our own security. 
But Congress can prevent a crisis by supporting peace negotiations now. Don't let the Sandinista Communists and their sympathizers be the only voices heard. Let our Members of Congress and Senators hear the voices of you who love liberty and democracy, too. Let's give peace a chance in Nicaragua and in all of Central America.


Interview With Foreign Journalists 
April 29, 1985
The President. No. I've had 4 years of fighting with the recognition that one House of our legislature is of the opposing party, as a majority of the opposing party. And your parliamentary systems—you don't have such things; the party and the individual are the same. But then, I had the experience of 7 out of 8 years as Governor of California having a hostile legislature, and yet we managed to accomplish a great many things. I have not given up on contra. Our position and the problem in Nicaragua, the vote up there and the debate, whether they admitted it or not, is simply: Do they want another totalitarian Marxist-Leninist government, like Cuba's, now on the mainland of the Americas, or do they want the people of Nicaragua to have the democracy that they're willing to fight for and that they did fight for in overthrowing the Somoza dictatorship? 
And whatever way they may want to frame it, the opponents in the Congress of ours, who have opposed our trying to continue helping those people, they really are voting to have a totalitarian Marxist-Leninist government here in the Americas, and there's no way for them to disguise it. So, we're not going to give up
The President. I've never considered it. What we have in Nicaragua is a revolution that was fought—and literally with our approval. The United States—I wasn't here then during the fighting of that revolution, but the United States stayed back. And anytime there's a revolution there are various factions, all of whom were opposed to the government that they're rebelling against, and they joined together. 
They promised all the other countries in the Americas—Canada, the United States, all the Latin American countries—they promised that their goal was a democratic government, with free elections, pluralism, free labor unions, human rights observed, freedom of speech and religion, and so forth. 
When the revolution was over, this country, under the previous administration, immediately went with aid—more financial aid to the new government of Nicaragua than had been given in 40 years to the previous government of Nicaraguare—but then saw them do exactly what Castro did in Cuba after his people won the revolution. The one faction, the Sandinistas—that faction eliminated all the other participants in the revolution. 
Some were exiled; some had to flee the country; many were jailed. And they drove them out, and then they made it plain, as Castro did in 1959, that they intended a Marxist-Leninist state. And they violated every promise they'd made to the Organization of American States. 
Now, the people that are so-called contras, that are fighting against this, are veterans of the revolution. They are not remnants of the previous government trying to get a dictatorship back in power. These are the people, many of them were imprisoned themselves by the previous dictator. And they're demanding a restoration of the democratic goals of the revolution. And we feel obligated to give them support. 
But the plan that we've asked the Congress to adopt is one in which those contras, themselves, have volunteered to lay down their weapons and ask them to be allowed to negotiate with their former companions in the revolution, the Sandinista government-negotiate how to restore the democratic goals. And they've asked that it be mediated by the church. 
Well, we have advanced that plan here and have said to the Congress that we will use whatever money is appropriated for food and medicines and so forth, not for military weapons. And we have the support of their allies—I mean, of their neighbors, Honduras and Costa Rica and Guatemala and El Salvador. The President of El Salvador has said that this is theright idea at theright time. And this is what we've asked of our own Congress, and it's what we want. 
We're not even seeking an overthrow of the present government. As a matter of fact, our plan says that while these negotiations go on, the present government stays in power. But it is simply for them to adopt the principles for which they said they were fighting in the first place.


Radio Address to the Nation on the Bonn Economic Summit 
May 4, 1985

In the area of security, we reaffirmed our determination to remain vigilant while working for progress in the Geneva arms control talks with the Soviets. The Soviet Union continues to be the major source of aggression in the world, building up its military forces far beyond any defensive needs and, through those forces and those of its satellites, promoting violence and repression across the globe, from Afghanistan to Cambodia to Nicaragua. So, we the democratic nations must continue to maintain our strength and keep the peace to enhance deterrence while striving, through negotiations, to achieve equitable and verifiable reductions in nuclear arsenals. The West will receive no gifts from the Soviets. Allied unity and resolve is the only message we can expect them to respect and respond to in a constructive way


Remarks at a Joint German-American Military Ceremony at Bitburg Air Base in the Federal Republic of Germany 
May 5, 1985

Twenty-two years ago President John F. Kennedy went to the Berlin Wall and proclaimed that he, too, was a Berliner. Well, today freedom-loving people around the world must say: I am a Berliner. I am a Jew in a world still threatened by anti-Semitism. I am an Afghan, and I am a prisoner of the Gulag. I am a refugee in a crowded boat foundering off the coast of Vietnam. I am a Laotian, a Cambodian, a Cuban, and a Miskito Indian in Nicaragua. I, too, am a potential victim of totalitarianism.


Remarks to Community Leaders in Madrid, Spain 
May 7, 1985

Freedom, we see, is contagious, and the force of your example has inspired a continent. When I first became President a little over 4 years ago, the map of our hemisphere was shadowed by dictatorships. But in country after country, the dictators have given way to the democratic aspirations of their people. Today, for the first time ever, the exceptions to the democratic tide in Spanish-speaking America can be counted on the fingers of one hand. They number four. Two, Paraguay and Chile, have entrenched military rule; the two others, Cuba and Nicaragua, are Communist tyrannies


Address to a Special Session of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France 
May 8, 1985

During the 1970's we went to great lengths to restrain unilaterally our strategic weapons programs out of the conviction that the Soviet Union would adhere to certain rules in its conduct—rules such as neither side seeking to gain unilateral advantage at the expense of the other. Those efforts of the early 1970's resulted in some improvements in Europe, the Berlin Quadripartite Agreement being the best example. But the hopes for a broader and lasting moderation of the East-West competition foundered in Angola, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua


The President's News Conference
May 10, 1985
The President. Well, we've said that we would be most helpful to anyone who wants to make this modification. We have seen enough examples, in the Americas alone, of military dictatorships or just outright dictatorships and pressure from the people in the democratic process changing those to the point that today south of our border, roughly 90 percent of the people in what we call Latin America are now living in democracies or in countries that are moving toward democracy. And the only two totalitarian powers in our hemisphere are Nicaragua and Cuba. So, it is true that there is evidence that right-wing governments or dictatorships—well, we're standing in one that has gone from dictatorship to democracy. The same was true in Spain, when we were there.

The President. I don't think there's any question, Chris [Chris Wallace, NBC News], that they don't agree with us about the threat—they do. They know what Nicaragua is. On the other hand, we're running into a kind of a philosophical difference here, I think with regard to sanctions. We did a lot of soul searching about it ourselves. There are a number of people, certainly a number of governments, who just don't believe in that as a legitimate weapon. 
On the other hand, when we were trying to get aid for the people of Nicaragua in their struggle for democracy and against totalitarianism, many of our own people in the Congress brought up the fact of how could we be doing this at the same time that we continued to maintain relations. Well, we had continued to maintain relations, and even including trade relations, with them as a refutation of their charge that we were seeking their overthrow. 
All we have ever sought is that they, as one faction—when I say "they," I mean the Sandinista government. That Sandinista government has never been legitimized by the people. It is one faction of a revolution that overthrew a dictator. And they stole that revolution away from the other factions which we now call the contras. And the leaders of the contras were leaders in that revolution also. 
And in doing that, we have felt that what we are seeking and trying to pressure them to do is to come together again in discussion and negotiations to restore the promises they, themselves, had made as to what the goals of the revolution were. And in doing that—and as I say, to refute their charges that we were somehow threatening them with aggression, and if you'll remember, there was a time when Mr. Ortega had us, every other week, landing the marines in Nicaragua, and we never had any intention to do such a thing. So, we maintained our embassy there, we continued our trade to show what we really wanted to do. 
And then, in this recent vote in the Congress, we found many Congressmen justifying their position on the grounds that how could we still be doing business and yet wanting to aid this other faction of the revolution. And we have decided that pressure is needed to bring them to the realization that they should restore the original goals of their revolution.



Remarks Following Discussions With President Jose Napoleon Duarte of El Salvador 
May 16, 1985

In his efforts to bring peace to his land, President Duarte has initiated a church mediated dialog with those fighting against his government. He has gone the extra mile to seek genuine reconciliation and to ensure his enemies theright to participate in the democratic process. He did not dictate who could represent the opposition. He met with both armed and unarmed opponents. His sincere efforts should serve as a model for all of Central America, especially those in Nicaragua who have notpermitted free and fair elections, have refused to participate in a church-mediated internal dialog, and have not followed peaceful policies toward their neighbors. 
President Duarte has much to be proud of. The recent successful election and the indisputable improvement in the human rights climate in El Salvador are due in no small part to his efforts. I deeply appreciate his courageous support of my Nicaraguan peace initiative of last April and of our trade embargo against Nicaragua. And I assured him that we will continue our efforts to thwart Communist aggression and subversion in the region. 
Peace will not be possible in Central America until Nicaragua ceases to support the subversion of its neighbors and itself achieves national reconciliation through democratic elections. The United States will continue working with President Duarte to build peace, prosperity, and freedom in his own land and to bring stability throughout Central America. It's been a great pleasure to exchange views with him today


Remarks at the Annual Republican Senate/House Fund-raising Dinner 
May 16, 1985

And I notice that many in our House of Representatives had second thoughts about their vote to block aid to the freedom fighters when Mr. Ortega immediately flew off to Moscow for what looked like a victory celebration. Mr. Ortega, of course, was looking for another installment on that almost $2 billion in military and economic assistance the Soviets and their friends have been pouring into Nicaragua to prop up the brutal Communist regime there. 
Sooner or later we are all forced to shed whatever illusions we may have had about the nature of Communist regimes. Let's only hope that this time it isn't too late for those brave Nicaraguans who are battling to bring freedom to their suffering country. 
I hope Congress will change its mind. I still think that we can together rise above partisanship and do what we know is right, and I think every American knows in his heart that supporting freedom and democracy is right. I'm convinced that last month's vote against the freedom fighters in Nicaragua will be remembered as only a short, shameful episode—an exception to our great country's historic allegiance to the cause of freedom and human rights


Remarks at the Convention of the National Republican Heritage Groups Council 
May 17, 1985

Now, don't mistake me, history has no inevitable outcome; it's still the work of free men and women; so, it's still up to you and me. So, if the cause of freedom is to continue to prosper, the United States must remain strong militarily and economically. We have to continue to strengthen institutions like Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. And we have to continue helping the resistance in Afghanistan and especially in Nicaragua. 
A few people who voted the other way with regard to Nicaragua in the Congress are doing a little rethinking since Mr. Ortega went on his Moscow tour. 
And yes, we have to continue to state in public the crucial moral distinctions between democratic government and the totalitarian state. And much of this will depend on how the Republican Party fares in the next few years. And once again I think the prognosis—but only with your help—is an optimistic one. Our party has been unstinting in its support of democratic development and the struggle against totalitarianism. We've led the way in supporting the resistance movements in Nicaragua and Afghanistan. And we can be proud that in supporting a strong defense, Radio Liberty, Radio Free Europe, and in being realistic about Soviet intentions, our party, the Republican Party, has led the way. 
You know, I've been encouraged by many of those in the Democratic Party who are wondering about a burden that some in their party would have them take on. Already many are asking if they really want to be remembered as the party that couldn't support vital weapons programs or the party that, at a critical turning point in the struggle between totalitarianism and freedom, did not aid those struggling to save freedom in their own countries—countries like Nicaragua—from totalitarian rule


Radio Address to the Nation on Armed Forces Day and Defense Spending 
May 18, 1985

I'm sure you've read about the discussions going on in the Congress on military spending. I'll reserve comment on them until the Congress has completed its current work, but I do want to say this much: One of the things that has most deeply disturbed Americans during the past decade, even though it isn't always talked about as much as other political issues, was the expansion of Soviet influence beyond their borders-Angola, Ethiopia, Cambodia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua are cases in point. This trend was of natural concern to the American people, especially right here on the continent


Remarks Following Discussions With President Roberto Suazo Cordova of Honduras 
May 21, 1985

I expressed to President Suazo my personal appreciation for his government's strong support for our policies in Central America. Our two governments share serious concern over the threat to the entire region posed by the Communist Sandinista regime in Nicaragua and its Cuban and Soviet supporters. President Suazo and I renewed ourcommitment to face this challenge together and to counter aggression and subversion
President Reagan. I was slapping a fly. [Laughter] 
President Reagan. Well, we'll see. We are going to try. 
President Reagan. I'm always optimistic. 
President Reagan. I killed a fly. 
President Reagan. I am not going to give any details. 


Remarks at the Annual Conference of the Council of the Americas 
May 21, 1985

With the energy and the creative talents of people like Bill Middendorf, Elliott Abrams, all of you here today, much has been accomplished in Central America. The people there, with the regrettable exception of Nicaragua, are enjoying the rising democratic tide

In Central America the downward economic spiral, by and large, has been halted. Excluding Nicaragua, the regional gross domestic product was up 1.2 percent in 1984. This year we expect regional growth, again excluding Nicaragua, of 2 1/2 percent

Recently a top Salvadoran guerrilla leader surrendered. And according to press reports, this commandant confirmed, as have other defectors, what we've been trying to tell some of the doubting Members of Congress: Nicaragua supplies and supports the Communist insurgency in El Salvador. The former Salvadoran guerrilla leader reportedly confirmed they'd been getting 20,000 to 30,000 rounds of ammunition and 5,000 sticks of TNT from Nicaragua every month, and he asserts they get 70 percent of their arms from Nicaragua. One encouraging thing we can say is that this does reflect something of a decline in what has been normal over the recent years; so possibly we're having some success in intercepting those shipments


Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers 
May 24, 1985

We are also determined to prevent the Communist regime in Nicaragua from exporting revolution. Since taking power in 1979 that regime has established regular censorship of the press, harassed the church, driven the Jewish community out of the country, and practiced virtual genocide against the Miskito Indians. They have expanded their military forces from 5,000 troops to regular forces of more than 60,000; from a handful of tanks and aircraft to more than 350 armored vehicles and tanks and an air force of 30 helicopters and 45 fixed-wing aircraft. 
Nicaragua is another pawn in the Soviet grand strategy of expansion—a direct challenge to America just 700 miles from our territory. Already more than 250,000 Nicaraguans have fled, many flooding into Costa Rica and Honduras. If the Sandinistas, the Communists, are allowed to export their violence, the flood will grow and our Southern States could become virtual refugee camps for hundreds of thousands—even millions—of the dispossessed. 
Our administration firmly believes that the United States should provide aid to the Nicaraguan freedom fighters struggling for the democratic ideals that the Sandinista revolution has betrayed. So far, the House of Representatives has blocked this aid, but we are going to come back again and again until the House fulfills its responsibilities to protect freedom and our own security


Remarks at a Fund-raising Dinner for Senator Paula Hawkins in Miami, Florida 
May 27, 1985

Senator Hawkins has been an articulate champion of our cause. She's been a leading figure, for example, in the fight against drug trafficking—a menace to every family in America. She has been working within the legislative process to support those countries that are battling the drug traffickers and penalize those that are not. She's made it her business to expose the Cuban-Nicaraguan drug connection. High-level officials of these governments have been personally implicated and, in some cases, indicted

Now, this role that they're playing in the insurgency in El Salvador—this despite the fact that top defectors from the El Salvadoran guerrillas have been telling us they receive guidance, training, funds, and vast amounts of arms and ammunition from their Communist friends in Nicaragua. Nicaragua today equals aggression, pure and simple. For the sake of peace in Central America, for the security of our own country, we cannotpermit these Communists to succeed. 
Closing our eyes and making a wish, which seems to be about the only course of action our opponents will support, won't make this threat go away. We need to assist those governments targeted by the Communists, and it's imperative that we support those brave individuals who are putting their lives on the line to bring democracy to Nicaragua. 
The freedom fighters are a shield for Nicaragua's democratic neighbors, preventing the Communist regime from focusing its full strength on subversion and aggression. The freedom fighters are the best hope for democracy in that troubled country. Those who would have us abandon them and the people of Nicaragua are cutting off our chances to avoid a major crisis in Central America


Remarks at a Fund-raising Luncheon for Senator Don Nickles in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 
June 5, 1985

Just south of our border we face a major challenge to democracy and our own security from Soviet-sponsored subversion and aggression. I'm happy to report that Don Nickles is one Senator who didn't have to wait until the dictator of Nicaragua went to Moscow before he knew he was a Communist. 
Congress can no longer ignore the obvious: The Soviet-bloc nations and their terrorist allies are pouring in weapons and ammunition to establish a beachhead on our own doorstep. Top defectors from the El Salvadoran guerrillas have given us detailed information about the guidance, the training, the funds, and the ammunition that they receive from the Communists in Nicaragua to overthrow the El Salvadoran democratic government that they have finally achieved. It was a dark day for freedom when, after the Soviet Union spent $500 million to impose communism in Nicaragua, the United States Congress could not support a meager $14 million for the freedom fighters in Nicaragua who were opposed to that totalitarian government


Remarks at a Fund-raising Dinner for Senator Mack Mattingly in Atlanta, Georgia 
June 5, 1985

If our country's not secure, nothing else has any meaning. Today, we as a nation face a challenge to our south. If we have the courage to do what is right, we can avoid a crisis. Inaction and lack of resolve are not the answer. The Soviet Union has poured hundreds of millions of dollars in military arms and equipment down there. We must assist those friendly governments under attack and help them defend themselves. And we must lend our support to those freedom fighters struggling for democracy in Nicaragua


Remarks at a Fund-raising Luncheon for Senator Jeremiah Denton in Birmingham, Alabama 
June 6, 1985

Some would like to ignore Nicaragua's connection to the international terrorist network, the PLO, Libya, and the followers of the Ayatollah Khomeini, who now-thanks to the Sandinista Communists—have a foothold in Central America, just 2 hours by air from our southern border. Some would like to ignore the incontrovertible evidence of the Communist religious persecution of Catholics, Jews, and fundamentalists; of their campaign of virtual genocide against the Miskito Indians; of their attempted subversion of their free, democratic neighbors. 
When it comes to the Communists in Nicaragua, some have adopted a see no, hear no evil, speak no evil attitude. But as the refugees come flooding out of Nicaragua, it becomes harder and harder not to hear their cries of anguish, not to see the suffering of their shattered lives. And it becomes all but impossible not to speak out against the tragedy the Communists are inflicting on their country. 
I remember in Washington a few weeks back meeting a young man who was a fundamentalist preacher in Nicaragua. His face was simply a gargoyle. He had prayed, and they came in the night, the military, with the Sandinistas, and took him out, tied him to a pillar of the house where he was sleeping and then threw gasoline in the house and set it on fire. Well, fortunately, the fires burned the ropes before they could kill him. But he, with his clothing in flames and his body in flames, fled. Campesinos found him, took him to a hospital. He had to hide who he was and how this had happened, or they would have caught him again. And he was in Washington, there, still speaking out for what he believes in. And what was his sin in the eyes of the Sandinista government? He'd prayed and prayed with some of the people, the citizens there who still wanted to have religion. 
When it comes to the Communists and what they're doing to their country, well, Daniel Ortega's money-run to the Soviet Union should have come as no surprise. Still, for many, it took this last trip to dispel their final illusions and to make it clear that the Nicaraguan Communists are no more and no less than agents of Soviet expansionism and the sworn enemies of freedom. 
But still, in spite of what some keep saying, we remain committed to a peaceful solution. And so do the democratic opposition in Nicaragua. But while they're waiting for their own government to talk to them, they must survive. And that's what our assistance is designed to do—to give peace a chance and to keep alive the goal of freedom in Nicaragua. 
Congress is now reconsidering its aid cutoff to the freedom fighters. In fact, the Senate vote comes up today. So, I'm afraid Jerry and I are going to have to do a quick disappearing act after my speech to get him up there in time to cast his vote to give freedom a chance in Nicaragua. 
If aid to the freedom fighters passes the Senate, which I have faith it will, then it'll be up to the Democratically controlled House to show the Sandinista Communists that they're not fooling anybody; that when it comes to supporting freedom and reconciliation in Nicaragua, the United States can be counted on. America stands as one






























